Title: Humanoid-DART: Humanoid Loco-Manipulation using Diffusion-guided Augmentation through Relabeling and Tracking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26855v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 00:50:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Humanoid-DART: Humanoid Loco-Manipulation using Diffusion-guided Augmentation through Relabeling and Tracking 

Pranav Debbad, Kanish Thiagarajan, Victor Dh´ edin, Shafeef Omar, Majid Khadiv 

Munich Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany. Email: firstname.lastname@tum.de 

Abstract — Imitating human demonstrations has emerged as a dominant paradigm for learning humanoid loco-manipulation policies. However, scaling these approaches remains challenging due to the high cost of collecting diverse demonstrations and the need for continual human intervention to correct policy failures. In this paper, we present a self-supervised framework that bootstraps from sparse demonstrations and progressively expands its behavioral repertoire, enabling the learning of a goal-conditioned policy that automatically explores the goal space with minimal expert supervision. Our approach com-bines diffusion-based trajectory generation with reinforcement learning, where the latter is used to track goal-conditioned trajectories produced by the diffusion model for a range of loco-manipulation skills. Through extensive ablation studies and comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on multiple humanoid loco-manipulation skills. A summary of the results can be found here. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Humanoid loco-manipulation requires coordinated whole-body control together with dynamic object interactions. Re-cent advances in imitation learning and reinforcement learn-ing (RL) have demonstrated impressive humanoid skills by tracking expert demonstrations [1], [2]. In these approaches, demonstrations are typically collected through motion cap-ture or teleoperation, retargeted to the robot embodiment, and used to train tracking-based RL policies. While recent generalist humanoid tracking policies [3], [4] achieve broad locomotion capabilities, their success relies heavily on the availability of large-scale human motion datasets [5]. Extending this paradigm to contact-rich loco-manipulation remains substantially more difficult. Unlike locomotion, loco-manipulation involves large continuous task spaces defined jointly by body motion, object states, and envi-ronmental interactions. Variations in object pose, transport configuration, grasp strategy, and interaction timing create a combinatorial space that is prohibitively expensive to cover with demonstrations alone. Consequently, despite progress in general motion tracking, learning a single policy capable of robustly solving diverse loco-manipulation tasks under varying environmental conditions remains an open challenge, with existing methods typically focusing on tracking a single reference behavior [6], [7]. In this work, we propose a curriculum-like framework that progressively expands the distribution of feasible goal-conditioned behaviors from only a small set of initial demonstrations. Our pipeline alternates between training a goal-conditioned motion generator and a motion-tracking     

> Fig. 1. Real-world deployment: Humanoid-DART trajectories deployed on a physical Unitree G1 humanoid for the push ,kick , and pick-and-place
> tasks (left to right).

policy, allowing both components to bootstrap one another toward increasingly diverse goals. Compared to policy-only RL curricula, this decomposition provides several advan-tages: the motion generator enables structured exploration in trajectory space and improves behavioral diversity in sparse-data settings; tracking rewards provide dense, task-agnostic supervision without extensive reward engineering; and separating high-level motion generation from low-level control reduces the burden on the generative model, enabling a more efficient and scalable learning pipeline. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:  

> •

We present Humanoid-DART, to the best of our knowl-edge, the first iterative trajectory augmentation pipeline for learning goal-conditioned loco-manipulation skills.  

> •

We introduce three key design choices. A hierarchical goal-conditioned Diffusion Transformer (DiT) for gen-erating humanoid and object reference trajectories; an RL whole-body controller, conditioned on the object pose, to track those trajectories; and a curriculum-based algorithm with a goal relabeling strategy that converts near-missed rollouts into valid training signals while guiding exploration across the task space.  

> •

We introduce two architecture choices for the motion generator that improve novel trajectory synthesis in the sparse-data regime: a dual-branch diffusion transformer architecture that separates root and object motion from local features such as joints, and a structured partial unmasking scheme that selectively reveals future feature groups during training to learn useful correlations.  

> •

We validate Humanoid-DART on a suite of humanoid loco-manipulation tasks (push, kick, hand-off, and pick & place), demonstrating task-space coverage from as few as four base demonstrations and generalization to goals well beyond the seed distribution. 

> arXiv:2606.26855v1 [cs.RO] 25 Jun 2026

II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Loco-Manipulation from Human Demonstration 

A dominant paradigm to generate humanoid loco-manipulation behaviors is to collect demonstrations via teleoperation and train imitation-learning policies from the resulting data [8]. To reduce the cost of direct data collection, retargeting pipelines transfer human motions to robot em-bodiments: [1] retargets kinematic pose sequences, while [6] explicitly preserves object and terrain contact relationships through interaction meshes. [7] refines kinematic retargeted trajectories (which usually contain artifacts) into dynamically feasible ones which improved the RL training efficiency and performance. Despite these advances, these approaches remain fundamentally limited by the coverage of the ini-tial dataset. Humanoid-DART addresses this bottleneck by leveraging generative models to iteratively expand the set of trajectory references, achieving an increasingly larger set of goals. 

B. Diffusion Models for Human/Humanoid Motion Synthesis 

Diffusion models [9] have become a powerful class of generative models for high-dimensional synthesis such as image generation. They are used in motion generation [10] and character control [11] to synthesize diverse motions from text or action labels. [2], [12] extend these works to hu-manoid robots for tracking motion sequences. [13] proposes a two-stage denoiser that decomposes root and body motion to suppress artifacts, which we adapt to our dual-branch transformer architecture. However, these works depend on the availability of large-scale data, while Humanoid-DART aims to augment a small initial dataset containing sparse demonstrations, leveraging diffusion motion generation for kinematic trajectory exploration rather than end-to-end con-trol. Additionally, we discuss some design decisions and training techniques for the diffusion model that enhance its expressiveness, enabling it to plan higher quality motions for novel goals. 

C. Curriculum Learning and motion synthesis 

In RL, curriculum learning refers to training agents by adapting task distributions or success criteria so that asingle policy gradually acquires more advanced behaviors, leveraging what it previously learned [14]. This is common practice in humanoid control as well as character animation [15]–[17] but usually rely on a single policy that must both explore and acquire skills through environment interaction, often requiring careful reward design to cover a broad range of behaviors. Related to our work, PARC [18] introduces an itera-tive simulation-based augmentation framework that alter-nates between motion generation and physics-based tracking. Humanoid-DART addresses a fundamentally different prob-lem: goal-conditioned loco-manipulation over a continuous object-goal space, where task completion requires explicit reasoning over robot-object contact. Beyond architecture, we introduce a curriculum and goal relabeling scheme to achieve coverage in a continuous object-goal space from as few as four seed demonstrations. Furthermore, we go beyond character animation and show that the new goals can be achieved on a real humanoid robot. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

In this work, we present Humanoid-DART, a pipeline that learns loco-manipulation skills from sparse demonstrations. An overview of the pipeline can be seen in Fig. 2. Our frame-work consists of three tightly coupled components: a Kine-matic Motion Generator implemented as a task-conditioned diffusion model, a Physics-Based Evaluator that validates generated motions in simulation, discriminating physically feasible motions from infeasible ones, and a Motion Tracking Policy trained to execute the generated trajectories. The rest of this section focuses on the main algorithm (Section III-A) and the curriculum (Section III-E), which are key novelties of the proposed pipeline. 

A. Algorithm 

The pipeline operates as an iterative curriculum over the current skill distribution, defined by the set of task goals covered by the existing trajectory archive E. At each itera-tion, we sample Nsampled goal states around this distribution, effectively expanding exploration to nearby but previously underrepresented regions of the task space. Conditioned on these goals, the motion generator πθ produces kinematic reference trajectories, which may contain physical incon-sistencies such as foot sliding, penetrations, or dynamic infeasibility. These kinematic references are then executed in a physics simulator using the motion tracking policy πϕ,which acts as a dynamic filter by converting potentially in-feasible motion plans into physically consistent rollouts. The resulting trajectories are evaluated using a fitness function 

F (τ ), and only those exceeding a threshold τf are retained in the elite archive E. Additionally, before being added to the archive, rollouts are relabelled to preserve valid goal-conditioned demonstrations. Finally, both components are updated using the expanded archive: the motion generator is retrained on E to improve goal-conditioned synthesis, while the tracking policy is refined via reinforcement learning to better reproduce the growing set of behaviors. Repeating this cycle progressively expands both the diversity of feasible trajectories and the coverage of the task space, enabling learning from a minimal set of initial demonstrations in a sparse-data regime (see Algorithm 1). 

B. Kinematic Motion Generator 

For motion generation, we adopt a generative modeling approach, using a goal-conditioned diffusion transformer to produce motions that lie close to the demonstration mani-fold. The generated motions are thus kinematically plausible and are taken as reference trajectories for the downstream tracking controller. The key design decisions for improving the expressivity and the kinematic consistency of the mo-tion generator were the motion representation, the network architecture, and training and inference techniques. Namely, we introduce a dual-branch backbone and structured-feature Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed Humanoid-DART pipeline. 

unmasking that increased the quality of the generated motion, as shown later in the results. 

a) Motion Representation: The expert demonstrations are converted into a segmented egocentric representation to increase data density and enable smoother motion stitch-ing across trajectories [8], [10]. All features are expressed relative to the robot’s local coordinate frame at t0, with trajectories translated and yaw-aligned [19] with respect to the robot’s global heading at t0. This normalization removes dependence on global position and heading, allowing mo-tion priors from different demonstrations to be more easily combined. The robot and object state at each frame t is represented by: 

τt = [∆ prob,xy , p rob,z , ∆ψrob , j pos , r rob,xy , rob pobj , rob robj ]

(1) where ∆prob,xy ∈ R2 is the root x–y displacement in the yaw-aligned egocentric frame at t0, prob,z ∈ R the absolute root height in the world frame, ∆ψrob ∈ R the root yaw rotation about the z-axis, jpos ∈ RNj the joint angles relative to the default pose, rrob,xy ∈ R6 the root pitch and roll in the 6D rotation representation [20], and rob pobj ∈ R3,

> rob

robj ∈ R6 the object position and orientation (6D) in the robot base frame. Robot heading (yaw) is separated from the remaining base orientation to mirror the hierarchical global/local structure of the generator; the robot-relative object pose mitigates kinematic artifacts such as floating and penetration. 

b) Network Architecture: Two design choices distin-guish our generator from a standard diffusion transformer. 

(i) Dual-branch backbone. Factorizing the state into world features (navigation) and local features (body kinematics) has been shown to improve motion diversity in human motion generation [13]. Here, the motion generator is a dual-branch DiT1D with a global stream over root motion and object-relative features, conditioned on task goals and motion history via AdaLN [21] modulation, and a local stream 

over body pose features. The local stream cross-attends to the global stream to stay synchronized with the global trajectory, decoupling coarse navigation from fine-grained pose synthesis but allowing conditioning. (ii) Structured partial unmasking. Inspired by [22], [23], which expose the denoiser to partial contexts, our motion generator uses per-token noise levels and selectively reveals noised feature groups from future frames during training in order to learn partial conditioning. This encourages the planner to infer the remaining motion components from partially observed states and to learn correlations between feature groups rather than treating each independently. Network dimensions and training details are provided in the Appendix. 

c) Inference: At inference, the motion denoiser models the conditional distribution pθ (τ(t0−th):( t0+tp) |

τ(t0−th): t0 , g ) using 10 deterministic DDIM steps. Long-horizon sequences are synthesised auto-regressively [24] over overlapping segments, each conditioned on h history frames from the previous segment and task goal g. History frames are inpainted (RePaint-style) [25] during denoising to enforce temporal consistency, and classifier-free guidance [26] is applied with a tunable guidance weight. 

d) Cross-attention analysis: To verify that the local stream exploits the global stream as intended, we inspect the local-to-global cross-attention of the trained motion gen-erator with and without structured partial unmasking. Each Algorithm 1 Humanoid-DART 

Require: Base demonstrations D0, fitness threshold τf ,sampling budget Nsampled 

Ensure: Elite archive E, diffusion model πθ , motion tracker 

πϕ 

> 1:

if D0 is kinematically feasible (KF) then  

> 2:

Pretrain πϕ on D0; roll out D0 under πϕ ▷ dynamic feasibility bootstrapping  

> 3:

E ← { τ ∗ | F (τ ∗) ≥ τf } ▷ seed archive with DF rollouts  

> 4:

else  

> 5:

E ← D 0 ▷ DF demonstrations seed archive directly  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Pretrain πθ on E ▷ Motion generator pretraining  

> 8:

for each generation g do  

> 9:

for each iteration k do  

> 10:

Sample {gi}Nsampled  

> i=1

via curriculum over E ▷

Goal sampling  

> 11:

Generate kinematic trajectories ˆτi ∼ pθ (τ |

τhist , g i) ▷ Goal-conditioned diffusion  

> 12:

Roll out ˆτi under πϕ; compute fitness Fi ∀ τ ∗ 

> i

▷

Physics evaluation  

> 13:

E ← E ∪ { τ ∗ 

> i

| Fi ≥ τf } ▷ Update elites with goal relabeling  

> 14:

Retrain πθ on updated E ▷ Motion Generator Training  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Retrain πϕ on E via PPO ▷ Motion Tracker training  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

return E, π θ , π ϕ

query token in the local stream—a single feature group of τt at one time step—attends to the global-stream key tokens; Figure 3 reports the resulting group cross-attention from the local-stream queries (rows) to the global-stream keys (columns), averaged over the attention heads and cross-attention layers. Without unmasking (Fig. 3, Left), attention collapses heavily onto the root height prob,z and largely ignores the object-relative pose. With unmasking (Right), the local stream additionally attends to the object-relative position and orientation ( rob pobj , rob robj ), recovering a cor-relation between whole-body pose synthesis and object inter-action that is highly relevant to humanoid loco-manipulation. 

C. Physics-Based Motion Evaluator 

In each iteration of the evolutionary pipeline, the motion generator produces Nsampled candidate trajectories attempting to realize different tasks, of which several may be dynam-ically infeasible, untrackable, or fail to solve the task. A rigorous selection mechanism is therefore essential to keep only the high-quality elites . The fitness function evaluates physical feasibility and task correctness as the product of several terms: Fitness = Rpos · Rvel · Rcontact · Rroot,pos · Rroot,ori · Rleg · Robj . 

> Fig. 3. Effect of structured partial unmasking on local-to-global cross-attention. Structured partial unmasking increases the attention of robot joints and pose to the object pose.

These terms evaluate the quality of the generated motions along two axes. Tracking fidelity is measured via Gaussian kernel terms exp( −∥ · ∥ 2/σ 2) over key body positions (Rpos , σ=0 .05 ), link velocities ( Rvel , σ=1 .0), pelvis-root position ( Rroot,pos , σ=0 .05 ) and orientation ( Rroot,ori , σ=0 .4), and lower-limb joint pose ( Rleg , σ=0 .04 ), each penalizing deviation from the reference trajectory. Contact correctness 

combines an indicator term Rcontact that checks whether the expected hand–object contacts are made at each timestep with a Gaussian term Robj (σ=1 .0) on the 6-DoF object pose error. A zero-gate sets the fitness to 0 on a fall or early termination. 

D. Dynamic Motion Tracker 

We implement a DeepMimic-inspired [27] tracking con-troller extended to handle object-robot contacts. Rewards penalise deviations from the reference root pose, body keypoints, joint positions, and end-effector contact states (full reward terms in the Appendix). The asymmetric actor-critic policy observes a 5-step reference horizon, propri-oceptive state, and object pose; the critic additionally re-ceives privileged simulation state. Following [2], we use adaptive trajectory- and state-level sampling (episodes ini-tialized mid-trajectory) to accelerate learning. Training uses massively parallelized Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) and domain randomization over object pushes, friction, and mass for robust sim-to-real transfer. Network sizes, observation terms, PPO hyperparameters, and domain-randomization ranges are provided in the Appendix. 

E. Curriculum 

The order in which goals in the task space are sampled af-fects the pipeline’s learning dynamics, both the rate at which the task space is covered and the stability of convergence. We define a task-space curriculum that governs how targets are queried across iterations. New goals are sampled inside and around an elite set E to both refine and explore skills. We additionally relabel near goal successes to provide a better learning signal. 

a) Frontier Target Sampling: Let B denote the set of all task-space bins induced by the task configuration and let cb ∈ Rd be the center of bin b. For example, in the pick-and-place task, the task space is the 2D goal displacement 

(x, y ) of the box, discretised into a uniform grid of bins with resolution ∆ = 0 .02 m. Given the current elite set 

E = {e1, . . . , e n}, the curriculum computes the minimum distance from the elites d(b), for each bin b, we have d(b) = min e∈E ∥˜cb − ˜me∥2, where ˜cb is the normalized bin center and ˜me is the normalized task metric of elite e. Two distance thresholds partition the task space into three zones: 

Refine : ( R = {b ∈ B | d(b) < δ ref }), eXplore : ( X = {b ∈B | δref ≤ d(b) < δ exp }), and Frontier : ( F = {b ∈ B | 

d(b) ≥ δexp ) regions. Bins near existing elites are treated as refinement targets, bins at intermediate distance encourage controlled coverage expansion, and far-away bins represent as-yet unsolved regions of the task space. The archive assigns each bin a sampling weight; the probability of sampling a bin is the ratio of its weight to the sum of weights across all bins, i.e., P (b) = wbP  

> b′∈B wb′

, where wb is wref , ∀ b ∈ R ;

wexp , ∀ b ∈ X ; and wfrontier , ∀ b ∈ F .In the reference implementation, exploration bins receive the highest weight, refinement bins receive a smaller but non-zero weight, and frontier bins receive a small probability mass so that the search occasionally proposes more ambitious outlying tasks. The concrete threshold and weight values, along with the remaining evolution hyperparameters, are listed in the Appendix. 

b) Goal Relabeling: The diffusion planner is condi-tioned on a sampled target, but the executed trajectory need not match it exactly. Rather than treating such deviations as failures, the pipeline relabels physically valid rollouts with their achieved task metrics. This mechanism is anal-ogous to [28], which recovers learning signal from failed goal-conditioned RL trajectories by retroactively treating the achieved state as the intended goal, and is particularly effective in early pipeline iterations where the generator is undertrained and systematic goal misses are common. IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

We evaluate Humanoid-DART through a combination of real-world deployment and large-scale simulation. As shown in Fig. 1, the loco-manipulation trajectories produced by our pipeline are deployed on a physical Unitree G1 humanoid, confirming that the generated motions are dynamically feasi-ble on hardware. Our experiments are designed to answer the following questions: 1) Can extremely sparse skills be scaled to a generalized task space using a curriculum-based ap-proach? 2) Can out-of-distribution skills be learned through a combination of goal-conditioned motion generation and reinforcement learning? 3) How does the quality and number of seed trajectories affect the pipeline’s coverage rate and convergence? 

A. Implementation 

We use reference motions from DynaRetarget [7] con-taining hundreds of dynamically feasible object-robot loco-manipulation trajectories. We implement Humanoid-DART in MuJoCo using mjlab [29] for GPU-accelerated RL. The motion tracking policy runs at 50Hz, while the motion generator generates full sequences of trajectories through autoregressive stitching with inpainting to ensure successive frames are continuous. We use a timestep ∆t = 0 .005 in MuJoCo with a decimation of 4 for the controller, and con-sider the full collision model of the robot. All experiments are run on a single NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU. We evaluate our pipeline on four loco-manipulation tasks of increasing complexity: push , kick , hand-off , and pick-and-place . In pick-and-place, the robot must grasp an object and transport it to a target location within a planar task space parameterised by goal displacement (x, y ) relative to the robot’s starting root pose. Push and kick share the same planar parameterisation but require distinct contact modes, whole-body pushing without a grasp, and foot-contact kick-ing respectively. Hand-off requires the robot to present an object at a target height and distance. For each task, we initialise the pipeline with a small set of 2 to 4 sparse base demonstrations, each capturing a distinct reference trajectory to a different goal configuration. Experiments use the Unitree G1 humanoid with 29 actuated degrees of freedom, manipu-lating a box whose friction and mass are randomized about their nominal values. The pipeline runs for g = 4 generations, with k = 10 

iterations per generation. At each iteration, Nsampled = 3000 

candidate trajectories are sampled via the curriculum and the motion generator is updated. At the end of each generation, the motion tracker is retrained on the elite buffer. 

B. Curriculum Performance 

Figure 4 illustrates the progression of elite trajectories at representative stages throughout the pipeline for the pick-and-place task. In early iterations, generated trajectories cluster around the base demonstrations, as expected. As the evolutionary process advances, the elite set progressively expands its coverage of the task space. By the fourth generation, the pipeline achieves near-complete coverage of the target task space. A notable emergent property of the pipeline is its ability to generate and track long-horizon, task-conditioned trajectories well beyond the scope of the base demonstrations. The base trajectories are approximately 5 seconds in duration, with goal placement distances in the range of 1–2 m. Despite this, the pipeline successfully gen-erates trajectories to goals 4-5x further away, demonstrating generalisation across the full task space. Fig. 5 shows the pipeline’s output at various timestamps. 

C. Comparison with Baselines 

We evaluate against two baselines chosen to isolate the contributions of our pipeline. Parameterised Motion [17] rep-resents the closest prior work in the space of parameterised skill generation from sparse demonstrations. Following the paradigm of [24], Hierarchical Diffusion + RL is a method in which the diffusion trajectory generator and the RL tracker are trained jointly in a single stage on the seed trajectories only, without the evolutionary loop. This isolates the benefit Fig. 4. Task-space coverage over the pipeline. Bins coloured by discovery order (purple=earliest, yellow=latest); green stars are seed demos; dashed region is the target space. Coverage grows from 0.1% to 96.6%.   

> Fig. 5. Family of learnt loco-manipulation skills for pick-and-place . Green motions are the seed base trajectories; the others are generated by the Humanoid-DART motion generator.

of our pipeline from the architectural choice of combining RL with diffusion. As summarised in Table I, Humanoid-DART achieves dominant task-space coverage across all four tasks, demon-strating the effectiveness of the iterative pipeline. The fitness and object stability results reveal a trade-off: Parameterised Motion achieves higher fitness on hand-off and pick-and-place, as it concentrates its limited coverage on a narrow re-gion of the task space where it can produce high-quality tra-jectories. In contrast, the lower average fitness of Humanoid-DART for these tasks reflects the challenge of maintaining trajectory quality across a far broader and more diverse set of goals. Hierarchical Diff. + RL consistently underperforms on both metrics, confirming that the evolutionary loop is the primary driver of performance. 

D. Motion Generator Architecture 

To justify our two main design decisions in isolation, we train each variant on the same four base loco-manipulation motions and evaluate it on a sweep of 20 novel goals. All metrics are computed directly on the generated kinematic trajectories, without the downstream RL tracking policy, in order to isolate the quality of the planner’s output indepen-dent of the controller, and capture goal-reaching accuracy, path quality, and grasp consistency. Table II highlights that the dual-branch backbone is decisive for goal-reaching: col-lapsing both streams into a single flat DiT drops the success rate from 1.00 to 0.25 , reflecting poor coordination between locomotion, manipulation, and whole-body pose. Structured partial unmasking improves path quality and grasp con-sistency: straighter, shorter object paths and lower hand–   

> TABLE I FINAL COVERAGE ,AVERAGE FITNESS ,AND OBJECT STABILITY ACROSS THE TASK SUITE .

Method Metric Push Kick H-off P&P Humanoid-DART 

Cov. ↑ 61.1 54.8 51.5 96.4 

Fit. † ↑ 3.28 19.8 3.2 4.9 Stab. ‡ ↑ 0.60 0.59 0.43 0.60 

Param. [17] Cov. ↑ 3.86 23.89 24.4 5.7 Fit. † ↑ 2.92 4.79 6.91 10.0 

Stab. ‡ ↑ 0.62 0.52 0.51 0.52 Hier. D+RL Cov. ↑ 2.2 2.6 32.0 6.2 Fit. † ↑ 1.1 1.77 4.1 0.9 Stab. ‡ ↑ 0.53 0.38 0.38 0.37    

> Cov. = coverage (%). †Avg. fitness ×10 −3.‡Obj. deviation from ref., exp. penalised; 1 = perfect.

object distance. The two components together increase the attention between the robot whole-body pose and the relative object pose, which is a useful correlation in humanoid loco-manipulation, as shown in Fig. 3. 

E. Pipeline Ablations 

We conduct ablation studies varying the number of base demonstrations provided at initialisation, allowing us to isolate the effect of initialisation sparsity on downstream task-space coverage. Additionally, we ablate the nature of the base trajectory used to seed the pipeline by considering artifact-free dynamically feasible (DF) trajectories and kine-matically feasible (KF) trajectories, produced via kinematic TABLE II MOTION GENERATOR ABLATIONS ON 20 NOVEL GOALS . G.E RR .: 

> OBJECT

–GOAL DISTANCE (M); S UCC .: FRACTION WITHIN 20 CM ; S TRT .: 

> STRAIGHTNESS

; P ATH : OBJECT PATH LENGTH (M); H– O: HAND –OBJECT DISTANCE AIRBORNE (M). 

Variant G.Err. ↓ Succ. ↑ Strt. ↑ Path ↓ H–o ↓

Dual-branch 0.115 1.00 0.68 4.70 0.26 

Dual (no unmask.) 0.121 1.00 0.58 6.30 0.32 Single-branch 0.316 0.25 0.34 13.96 0.42 

retargeting only, which may contain contact inconsistencies and penetration. Results are summarised in Table III. 

TABLE III COVERAGE VS . NUMBER AND TYPE OF BASE DEMONSTRATIONS . tx% : 

> TIME

(H) TO REACH x% COVERAGE ; –: NOT REACHED .

Init. # t20 t50 t80 Cov.% Fit. 

DF 1 1.82 3.64 – 77.3 3.69 

2 1.2 2.0 3.65 91.2 4.17 

4 0.6 1.5 3.3 96.4 4.9

KF 2 2.38 – – 28.8 1.37 

Pick & place task. Fitness scaled by ×10 −3.

The gap between KF and DF initialization shows that the diffusion generator inherits and amplifies biases in the seed trajectories. Kinematically retargeted seeds with physical inconsistencies produce lower-quality candidates and slower coverage growth, whereas dynamically feasible and diverse seeds lead to higher-quality elites, faster convergence, and improved coverage. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

We present Humanoid-DART, an iterative pipeline for learning goal-conditioned humanoid loco-manipulation poli-cies from sparse demonstrations. By coupling a goal-conditioned diffusion motion generator with a physics-based RL tracking controller through an evolutionary pipeline, Humanoid-DART progressively expands the set of phys-ically feasible behaviors across a continuous task space without large-scale human supervision. Across multiple loco-manipulation settings, and in particular pick-and-place, Humanoid-DART achieves near-complete task-space cover-age from as few as four base demonstrations (20 seconds of motion), generalizing to goals four to five times beyond the seed range. Our evaluation is currently restricted to a single object geometry and flat terrain; extending the framework to more diverse objects, contact properties, and uneven terrain re-mains the focus of future work. The pipeline also inherits the biases of the seed demonstrations and depends on a carefully calibrated fitness function, which can be replaced with an adaptive, learned criterion that scores motion quality directly from data and adjusts its selectivity as coverage grows, reducing the reliance on hand-tuned terms. REFERENCES [1] T. He, Z. Luo, W. Xiao, C. Zhang, K. Kitani, C. Liu, and G. Shi, “Learning human-to-humanoid real-time whole-body teleoperation,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04436 , 2024. [2] Q. Liao, T. E. Truong, X. Huang, Y. Gao, G. Tevet, K. Sreenath, and C. K. Liu, “Beyondmimic: From motion tracking to versatile humanoid control via guided diffusion,” 2025. [3] K. Yin, W. Zeng, K. Fan, M. Dai, Z. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Tian, J. Wang, J. Pang, and W. Zhang, “Unitracker: Learning universal whole-body motion tracker for humanoid robots,” 2025. [4] Z. Luo, Y. Yuan, T. Wang, C. Li, F. Casta˜ neda, S. Chen, Z.-A. Cao, J. Li, D. Minor, Q. Ben, J. Park, D. Sami, Z. Wang, X. Da, R. Ding, C. Hogg, L. Song, E. Lim, E. Jeong, T. He, H. Xue, W. Xiao, S. Yuen, J. Kautz, Y. Chang, U. Iqbal, L. J. Fan, and Y. Zhu, “Sonic: Supersizing motion tracking for natural humanoid whole-body control,” 2026. [5] N. Mahmood, N. Ghorbani, N. F. Troje, G. Pons-Moll, and M. J. Black, “AMASS: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes,” in 

International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 5442–5451, Oct. 2019. [6] L. Yang, X. Huang, Z. Wu, A. Kanazawa, P. Abbeel, C. Sferrazza, C. K. Liu, R. Duan, and G. Shi, “Omniretarget: Interaction-preserving data generation for humanoid whole-body loco-manipulation and scene interaction,” 2025. [7] V. Dhedin, I. Taouil, S. Omar, D. Yu, K. Tao, A. Dai, and M. Khadiv, “Dynaretarget: Dynamically-feasible retargeting using sampling-based trajectory optimization,” 2026. [8] M. Seo, S. Han, K. Sim, S. H. Bang, C. Gonzalez, L. Sentis, and Y. Zhu, “Deep imitation learning for humanoid loco-manipulation through human teleoperation,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2023. [9] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 2020. [10] G. Tevet, S. Raab, B. Gordon, Y. Shafir, D. Cohen-Or, and A. H. Bermano, “Human motion diffusion model,” 2022. [11] X. Huang, T. Truong, Y. Zhang, F. Yu, J. P. Sleiman, J. Hodgins, K. Sreenath, and F. Farshidian, “Diffuse-cloc: Guided diffusion for physics-based character look-ahead control,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 44, no. 4, p. 1–12, 2025. [12] D. Kalaria, S. S. Harithas, P. Katara, S. Kwak, S. Bhagat, S. Sastry, S. Sridhar, S. Vemprala, A. Kapoor, and J. C.-K. Huang, “Dream-control: Human-inspired whole-body humanoid control for scene interaction via guided diffusion,” 2025. [13] D. Rempe, M. Petrovich, Y. Yuan, H. Zhang, X. B. Peng, Y. Jiang, T. Wang, U. Iqbal, D. Minor, M. de Ruyter, J. Li, C. Tessler, E. Lim, E. Jeong, S. Wu, E. Hassani, M. Huang, J.-B. Yu, C. Chung, L. Song, O. Dionne, J. Kautz, S. Yuen, and S. Fidler, “Kimodo: Scaling controllable human motion generation,” arXiv:2603.15546 , 2026. [14] S. Narvekar, B. Peng, M. Leonetti, J. Sinapov, M. E. Taylor, and P. Stone, “Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: A framework and survey,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,vol. 21, no. 181, pp. 1–50, 2020. [15] T. Huang, J. Ren, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Ben, M. Wen, X. Chen, J. Li, and J. Pang, “Learning humanoid standing-up control across diverse postures,” 2025. [16] C. Zhang, W. Xiao, T. He, and G. Shi, “WoCoCo: Learning whole-body humanoid control with sequential contacts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06005 , 2024. [17] S. Lee, S. Lee, Y. Lee, and J. Lee, “Learning a family of motor skills from a single motion clip,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 40, July 2021. [18] M. Xu, Y. Shi, K. Yin, and X. B. Peng, “Parc: Physics-based augmentation with reinforcement learning for character controllers,” in 

Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’25, (New York, NY, USA), Association for Com-puting Machinery, 2025. [19] Z. Luo, J. Cao, J. Merel, A. Winkler, J. Huang, K. Kitani, and W. Xu, “Universal humanoid motion representations for physics-based control,” 2024. [20] Y. Zhou, C. Barnes, J. Lu, J. Yang, and H. Li, “On the continuity of rotation representations in neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 5745–5753, 2019. [21] W. Peebles and S. Xie, “Scalable diffusion models with transform-ers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 4195–4205, 2023. [22] B. Chen, D. M. Monso, Y. Du, M. Simchowitz, R. Tedrake, and V. Sitzmann, “Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion,” 2024. [23] C. Tessler, Y. Guo, O. Nabati, G. Chechik, and X. B. Peng, “Masked-mimic: Unified physics-based character control through masked mo-tion inpainting,” 2024. [24] Y. Lin, Y. Xie, J. Xie, Y. Huang, R. Wang, J. Lv, Y. Ma, and X. Zuo, “Simgenhoi: Physically realistic whole-body humanoid-object interaction via generative modeling and reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14120 , 2025. [25] A. Lugmayr, M. Danelljan, A. Romero, F. Yu, R. Timofte, and L. Van Gool, “RePaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion prob-abilistic models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 11461–11471, 2022. [26] J. Ho and T. Salimans, “Classifier-free diffusion guidance,” 2022. [27] X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and M. van de Panne, “DeepMimic: Example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based charac-ter skills,” in ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) , vol. 37, 2018. [28] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welin-der, B. McGrew, J. Tobin, P. Abbeel, and W. Zaremba, “Hindsight experience replay,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. [29] K. Zakka, Q. Liao, B. Yi, L. Le Lay, K. Sreenath, and P. Abbeel, “mjlab: A Lightweight Framework for GPU-Accelerated Robot Learn-ing,” 2026. 

APPENDIX 

To keep the exact settings reproducible and machine-readable, we provide all remaining hyperparameters as Python configuration files as supplementary material:  

> •

the motion-generator backbone and training settings;  

> •

the pipeline and curriculum hyperparameters;  

> •

the actor–critic network architecture;  

> •

the motion-tracker reward terms;  

> •

the PPO optimisation hyperparameters;  

> •

the motion-tracking policy observation terms;  

> •

the domain randomisation and reference-state initialisa-tion ranges. We will open-source the codebase upon acceptance of the paper.