Title: AlloEgo-VLM: Disambiguating Allocentric and Egocentric Reference Frames in Vision-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15605v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:18:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
> arXiv:2608.15605v1 [cs.CV] 16 Aug 2026

CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 1

# AlloEgo-VLM: Disambiguating Allocentric and Egocentric Reference Frames in Vision–Language Models 

Kuan-Lin Chen (Student) 

andy90123.ai12@nycu.edu.tw 

Tzu-Ti Wei (Student) 

a2699560.ai09@nycu.edu.tw 

Chao-Chi Liao (Student) 

apricity.cs13@nycu.edu.tw 

Yu-Chee Tseng (Prof) 

https://sites.google.com/view/yctseng 

Jen-Jee Chen (Prof) 

https://people.cs.nycu.edu.tw/~chencz/ Institute of Computer Science and Engineering & College of Artificial Intelligence National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan https://github.com/CKL9001/AlloEgo-VLM.git 

Abstract 

This study investigates the challenge of ambiguity faced by Vision–Language Mod-els (VLMs) in understanding spatial semantics. Spatial cognition, shaped by cognitive psychology, spatial science, and cultural context, often assigns directionality to objects. However, natural language descriptions of spatial relations frequently omit explicit refer-ence frames, leading to semantic ambiguity and potentially serious errors for embodied AI robots. Existing VLMs, due to insufficient training on reference frames and object orientations, often produce inconsistent responses. To address this issue, we construct a new dataset, AlloEgo-View , comprising (image, query, view-specific answer) triplets that capture key object relations from both allocentric and egocentric perspectives. The view-specific descriptions follow a structured spatial representation that annotate detailed scene descriptions, reference and target objects, their orientations, reference frames, and view types. Building on AlloEgo-View, we develop AlloEgo-VLM , a framework to disam-biguate allocentric and egocentric reference frames, even under ambiguous queries, and to be easily integrated into existing VLMs via supervised fine-tuning. Furthermore, we deploy our framework onto an embodied robotic platform within NVIDIA Isaac Sim to validate its real-world feasibility in open-ended object searching tasks. Experiments high-light the limitations of current VLMs in handling view-specific queries and demonstrate the strong disambiguation ability of AlloEgo-VLM. 

© 2026. The copyright of this document resides with its authors. It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms. 2 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

# 1 Introduction Robot Egocentric Observation             

> Find the plant
> right of the sofa
> AlloEgo -VLM
> General VLM
> Observer (Ambiguous Query)
> The plant is left of the sofa.
> High VAR
> Ambiguous Output
> Perspective: Egocentric (from the observer's
> point of view)
> Answer: The plant is to the left of the sofa.
> Perspective: Allocentric (from the sofa's
> point of view)
> Answer: The plant is to the right .
> Structured Spatial Representation
> High VSA
> AlloEgo -View

+  

> Reference Object
> Target Wrong
> Target
> (LoRA SFT)

Figure 1: Under an ambiguous instruction, general VLMs suffer from high view ambiguity rate (VAR). AlloEgo-VLM resolves this by decoupling spatial se-mantics into explicit egocentric and allocentric perspec-tives, ensuring precise view-specific accuracy (VSA). Understanding spatial semantics is a fundamental capability for Vision–Language Models (VLMs), particularly in human–robot inter-action and embodied AI for naviga-tion and manipulation tasks [3, 11]. However, spatial descriptions in natural language are inherently am-biguous due to the diversity of ref-erence frames employed by hu-mans. Research in cognitive psy-chology and spatial science has shown that people often omit ex-plicit reference frames in conversation, instead relying on context or cultural conven-tions [10, 17, 23]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, reference object sofa is facing the observer. 

“Find the plant right of the sofa” yields distinct interpretations depending on whether an ego-centric or allocentric perspective is assumed [7]. General VLMs regularly fail due to shallow image-space heuristics; they default to the observer’s viewpoint, producing an uncalibrated response ( “The plant is left of the sofa” ) that incorrectly anchors onto the Wrong Target ,leading to a high View Ambiguity Rate (VAR) . Conversely, AlloEgo-VLM suppresses this ego-bias through a dual-perspective Structured Spatial Representation . By decoupling the relations—identifying the object as egocentric left but allocentric right—our model correctly grounds the true Target and achieves superior View-Specific Accuracy (VSA) .Similar challenges have been noted in prior works [40] on robot navigation [18, 37], 

abstract perspective change [16], and video action prediction [42]. These studies introduced datasets or benchmarks annotated with reference frames, providing valuable resources for spatial reasoning. However, their problem formulations often require users to explicitly specify the reference frame—either directly or implicitly—in their queries (e.g., “Find the plant right of the sofa from the perspective of the observer.” ). In other cases, the evaluations are framed as multiple-choice tasks. Such settings do not fully reflect real-world scenarios, where humans rarely phrase spatial questions in such explicit or verbose ways. Our work does not seek to eliminate the inherent ambiguity that has existed in human language for centuries. Instead, it aims to enable robots and VLMs to handle naturally ambiguous queries without requiring users to explicitly specify the reference frame. Even for a simple question such as “Where is the plant?” , the system should automatically resolve inconsistent interpretations and generate the correct answer across different reference frames. Building on these observations, we note that existing VLMs and embodied AI systems are rarely trained with explicit annotations of reference frames or object orientations, often resulting in inconsistent or even contradictory spatial reasoning [32, 35]. Quantitative analyses highlight the severity of this issue: in VSI-Bench (tiny), 71% of errors stem from spatial reasoning, with nearly 22% attributed to egocentric–allocentric transformations [37]. In COMFORT++ and 3DSRBench, baseline VLMs perform close to random under allocentric views (LLaVA-NeXT 48%, SpatialVLM 46%, Molmo 36%), reflecting ambiguity rates of 45–60% [16]. Our experiments further show that even state-of-the-art models collapse due to the lack of view awareness and disambiguation capabilities (refer to Sec. 5.1). CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 3

Without awareness of the natural ambiguity in human language, an embodied robot may easily misinterpret spatial relations, leading to serious navigation errors or unsafe manipulations. The fundamental challenge of resolving orientation and direction ambiguity in real-world, unconstrained language remains largely unsolved. To address these issues, we construct a new dataset, AlloEgo-View , comprising (image, query, answer) triplets, where queries may contain natural linguistic ambiguity, while the answers are view-specific with explicit reference frames for disambiguating allocentric and egocentric viewpoints. Based on AlloEgo-View, we develop AlloEgo-VLM , a plug-and-play module with a multi-stage training framework that progressively expands view-specific data and fine-tunes VLMs to enhance spatial reasoning and view-specific grounding across perspectives, thereby improving the base model over successive stages. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We identify and formalize the problem of reference-frame ambiguity in Vision– Language Models (VLMs) and highlight its implications for embodied AI. • We construct AlloEgo-View , a dataset with explicit allocentric and egocentric reference-frame annotations for spatial reasoning. • We propose AlloEgo-VLM , a plug-and-play framework with multi-stage training that progressively expands reference-frame-aware data and improves spatial grounding across perspectives. • Extensive experiments demonstrate improved spatial reasoning and reference-frame grounding over existing VLMs. Deployment in NVIDIA Isaac Sim further validates the framework in open-ended robotic object search tasks. 

# 2 Related Work 

## 2.1 Large Language and Vision–Language Models 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in tasks such as text summarization, question answering, and multi-step reasoning [2, 24]. Instruction tuning has further aligned these models with human preferences [27, 36]. Building on these advances, recent research has extended into multi-modality, giving rise to VLMs. Representative VLMs such as GPT-4o [25], LLaVA [21], and InstructBLIP [5] demonstrate strong performance in various visual tasks. Their ability to integrate linguistic reasoning with visual grounding makes them promising candidates for spatial relations reasoning. 

## 2.2 Spatial Understanding in VLMs 

Recent research has explored a wide spectrum of spatial understanding tasks that extend across both 2D and 3D domains. These include predicting object size and relative scale [38], estimating distances and depth relations [19], and reasoning about directions or object localization within complex scenes [4]. In 3D settings, spatial reasoning further encompasses navigation, scene reconstruction, and embodied object interaction tasks [33, 40]. To support these tasks, a number of benchmarks and datasets have been developed. CLEVR 

[13] provides synthetic images with compositional object arrangements and detailed spatial relationships, enabling controlled reasoning tests. GQA [9] extends this to real-world images with structured scene graphs, supporting multi-step reasoning. SpatialSense [38] focuses on natural images with annotated spatial relationships, while SPAR [39] captures relational 4 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM                                                        

> Dataset Task Description View Type MCAF RFF Scale
> CLEVR [13] Visual reasoning (synthetic QA) Ego △✓∼700K GQA [9] VQA + scene graph reasoning Ego △✓∼22M SpatialSense [38] Pairwise spatial relation classification Ego ✓✓∼11K SPAR [39] Spatial perception and reasoning Ego △✓∼7M Thinking in Space [37] Video reasoning and memory Allo, Ego ××∼5K Perspective Aware [16] Abstract perspective change Allo, Ego ✓×-SPHERE [40] Spatial perception and hierarchical reasoning Allo, Ego △×∼2K ViewSpatial-Bench [18] Cross-view spatial reasoning Allo, Ego ✓×∼5K VLMD4 [42] Video spatial reasoning Allo, Ego ×✓∼1K AlloEgo-View (ours) Reference-frame reasoning Allo, Ego ✓✓∼4K

Table 1: Comparison of spatial understanding datasets. MCAF denotes “multi-choice answer-free queries” (e.g., [37] requires verbose queries with predefined options). RFF denotes “reference-frame-free queries” (e.g., [18] requires explicit reference-frame specification). AlloEgo-View supports natural queries such as “Where is the refrigerator?” ( ✓ = yes, × = no, 

△ = partial). ambiguity by providing multiple valid interpretations of spatial descriptions. ViewSpatial-Bench [18] and Spatial-Comfort [41] tackle reasoning consistency under viewpoint variation. Despite these advances, most existing approaches still treat spatial reasoning primarily as a geometric or relational problem, without addressing how linguistic descriptions vary across perspectives and contexts, such as allocentric and egocentric views. 

## 2.3 Allocentric and Egocentric Perspectives 

Egocentric perspective describes spatial relations from the observer’s viewpoint, while 

allocentric perspective describes them relative to surrounding objects, independent of the observer. Cognitive studies suggest that humans naturally switch between these perspectives depending on context, task demands, and communicative efficiency [1, 26]. However, current VLMs often struggle to robustly handle such variation. Recent datasets, such as ViewSpatial-Bench [18] and Spatial-Comfort [41], highlight the importance of perspective shifts but remain limited in design. For instance, they rely on explicit perspective markers in the input (e.g., “from the viewer’s perspective ...”) or adopt multiple-choice formats—both of which deviate from natural language usage, where speakers typically convey spatial relations without verbose reference-frame indicators. As a result, VLMs often generate inconsistent or even contradictory outputs when faced with short, naturally ambiguous queries. This limitation underscores the need for models that can automatically disambiguate perspective-dependent descriptions and provide stable interpretations across both egocentric and allocentric frames—without relying on explicit cues from users. A comparison of representative datasets is presented in Table 1, showing that our AlloEgo-View enables more natural interactions. 

# 3 AlloEgo-View: A New View-Specific Dataset 

Spatial reference frame refers to the coordinate system used to specify the position or orien-tation of an object. The AlloEgo-View dataset contains 0.5K manually calibrated samples, 3.5K automatically generated training samples, and 1K manually annotated testing samples. Each sample is a view-specific triplet (image , query , answer ) designed to reduce ambiguity between allocentric and egocentric viewpoints. Fig. 2 illustrates the data curation pipeline. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 5

## 3.1 RGB Image Selection Structured Query Generation                   

> AlloEgo-View Dataset
> Answer Query
> Structured Answer Generation
> RGB Image Depth Map
> Preliminary Answer Generation
> Position and Direction Refinement
> Depth Enhancement
> Manual calibration
> Answer
> Question Template
> 1) Where is the <Target Object> in relation to the <Ref erence Object> ?
> 2) How are the <Target Object> and <Reference Object> positioned?
> 3) Can you describe where the <Target Object> is?
> ...
> Query
> Answer
> <Reference Object>
> <Target Object>
> Image Selection
> 2≦Objects ≦6
> Object Detection
> (YOLO-v10)
> Image Selection Prompt
> VLM (GPT-4o)
> Source Image

Figure 2: AlloEgo-View data curation pipeline. Each triplet consists of an image, a natural but potentially am-biguous query, and an answer that provides detailed ego-centric and allocentric view descriptions. 

We collect images from multiple sources, including GQA [9], SPAR [39], 

COCO [20], and NYU Depth V2 [31]. These images undergo a two-step screening process to ensure suitable reference-frame reasoning. 

Step 1. Each RGB image is pro-cessed using YOLOv10 [34] for object detection, unless object annotations are already provided by the dataset. An image is retained only if it contains be-tween two and six distinct objects. 

Step 2. Each image is further evalu-ated using GPT-4o . A screening prompt determines whether the image contains two to six distinct objects and whether the scene is relatively clean and uncluttered. The response is binary, and only images that pass the screening are retained. Prompt details are provided in the Supplementary Material. 

## 3.2 Structured Spatial Answer Generation 

Next, we describe the workflow for generating structured spatial answers from the retained images (Fig. 3a). We first construct an initial answer framework (Fig. 3b), which is then refined by incorporating allocentric and egocentric view information. 

Step 1: Preliminary Answer Generation. Each image is processed by GPT-4o (prompt provided in the Supplementary Material) to generate an initial structured answer containing: 1. Overall scene description 2. Reference object <Ref Obj> and target object <Tgt Obj> 

3. Absolute directions of the reference object <Ref Abs Dir> and target object <Tgt Abs Dir> 

4. Egocentric view description 5. Allocentric view description The output structure is illustrated in Fig. 3b. The two objects, <Ref Obj> and <Tgt Obj> , are automatically selected by GPT-4o according to the prompt. Their absolute direc-tions, <Ref Abs Dir> and <Tgt Abs Dir> , are also determined by GPT-4o. In the egocentric view description, the first two statements specify the objects’ positions, <Ref Pos> and <Tgt Pos> , within the image, while the third statement describes the relative relation, <Ego Rel Dir> , between the two objects from the observer’s viewpoint. In the allocentric view description, the previous two position statements need not be repeated; instead, a single statement specifies the reference frame, <Ref Obj> , and their relative direction, <Allo Rel Dir> . The rationale behind designing this structured format will be explained in the subsequent experiments. According to our experiments, most VLMs tend to produce multiple errors in the above descriptions. To correct these errors, <Ref Pos> , <Tgt Pos> , and <Ego Rel Dir> in the egocentric view description are refined in Step 2. Step 3 further enhances the description 6 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

by incorporating depth information, thereby capturing the spatial front–back relations between objects. Remaining errors are manually corrected in Step 4, primarily involving updates to 

<Ref Abs Dir> , <Tgt Abs Dir> , and the allocentric view description. In the example shown in Fig. 3, the orange-highlighted parts are corrected in Step 2, the yellow-highlighted parts are refined in Step 3, and the blue-highlighted parts are manually adjusted in Step 4. The complete final answer is provided in the Supplementary Material. 

> (a)
> (b)

Figure 3: Structured spatial answer genera-tion: (a) overall workflow and (b) standardized answer format. 

Step 2: Position and Direction Refine-ment. To calibrate <Ref Pos> , <Tgt Pos> , and <Ego Rel Dir> , we first ap-ply Grounding DINO [22] using <Ref Obj> , <Tgt Obj> , and the image as inputs. Grounding DINO identifies the instance-level grounding of each object, and its outputs are the corresponding bounding boxes. Next, we propose the PosDir algorithm, which determines the absolute and relative positions of the two objects in the image from an egocentric viewpoint. 1. Evenly partition the image into a 3 ×

3 grid. Textual descriptions <Ref Pos> and <Tgt Pos> are gen-erated for <Ref Obj> and <Tgt Obj> based on the overlap between their bounding boxes and the grid re-gions. 2. The textual description <Ego Rel Dir> is generated according to the relative positions of the centers of the two bounding boxes. These descriptions are then used to update the initial answer generated in Step 1. In Fig. 3a, the orange-highlighted segments indicate the updated egocentric view description. The complete algorithm is provided in the Supplementary Material. 

Step 3: Depth Enhancement. As an egocentric view involves two objects and the ob-server, the relative depth ordering is critical. To incorporate depth information, we first extract the segmentation maps of <Ref Obj> and <Tgt Obj> using Segment Any-thing Model (SAM) [15], where the input bounding boxes are provided by Grounding DINO from Step 2. Second, we compute the object’s depth maps by performing element-wise multiplication between each object’s segmentation map and the image depth map: 

SAM (<Ref Obj> /<Tgt Obj> ) ⊙ Depth (Image ). Third, we calculate the mean depth of each object based on its depth centroid. We then propose the DepOrd algorithm to deter-mine their relative depth ordering. By comparing the mean depths, one of the following three relations is obtained: “ <Ref Obj> is deeper,” “ <Tgt Obj> is deeper,” or “no depth ordering.” For example, in Fig. 3a, the man is closer to the observer, forming a front–back relationship with the woman. Therefore, an additional description (yellow-highlighted parts), “The man in CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 7

a boxing stance is between the observer and the woman holding a wine glass,” is included. The complete algorithm is provided in the Supplementary Material. 

Step 4: Manual calibration. We address errors through manual review. This primarily involves updates to <Ref Abs Dir> , <Tgt Abs Dir> , and <Allo Rel Dir> . To-tally 0.5K answers are produced. We note that <Allo Rel Dir> is particularly prone to errors, as it heavily depends on the facing direction of <Ref Obj> , which necessitates additional manual effort. In Fig. 3a, the blue-highlighted parts are updated. 

## 3.3 Structured Spatial Query Generation 

To enable AlloEgo-VLM to respond naturally during inference, we associate each above answer with a structured spatial question. We define a set of 17 question templates to capture a wide variety of user queries, ranging from direct relational questions to more conversational descriptions. This ensures linguistic diversity while maintaining semantic consistency. Given any pair ( <Ref Obj> , <Tgt Obj> ), we show two representative question examples: a) What is the relationship between the <Tgt Obj> and the <Ref Obj> ?b) Could you describe where the <Tgt Obj> is located? During dataset construction, one random template is selected for each question. The complete list of 17 templates is provided in the Supplementary Material. 

# 4 AlloEgo-VLM for Reference–Frame Disambiguation 

Figure 4: AlloEgo-VLM Framework. The proposed AlloEgo-VLM is designed to answer not only questions with reference-frame ambiguity, but also general non-spatial reasoning questions, while support-ing multi-round conversations. The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 4. We adopt a base VLM and fine-tune it with an AlloEgo-Adapter that follows our structured spatial reasoning format. Al-though the initial AlloEgo-View dataset is small in scale, it enables the use of quantization, LoRA-based [6] supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and bootstrapped data generalization to pro-gressively expand the dataset and train a robust model. To address view-specific queries, we train a lightweight Spatial Query Classifier to determine the query type. If a query is identified as view-specific, the model activates the AlloEgo-Adapter for structured spatial processing; otherwise, the base VLM directly generates the response. This design enables efficient handling of both spatial and non-spatial tasks. We adopt Qwen 2.5-VL-7B [28], Llama 3.2-V-11B [24], and Gemma 3-V-4B [8] as the backbone VLMs of AlloEgo-VLM. The lightweight classifier is trained on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. 

## 4.1 Multi-stage Training of AlloEgo-Adapter 

From a frozen base VLM, we train an AlloEgo-Adapter in an iterative manner. During the multi-stage training, we also expand the initial AlloEgo-View dataset from a scale of 0.5K to 8 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

4K, inspired by DPO [29]. The pipeline is shown in Fig. 5. 

Figure 5: Multi-stage training pipeline of AlloEgo-Adapter and progressive expansion of AlloEgo-View. 

Step 1: AlloEgo-Adapter Fine-Tuning. 

We perform QLoRA-based [6] SFT on the base VLM using the AlloEgo-View dataset, resulting in AlloEgo-Adapter , which aligns the base VLM with our structured spatial reasoning format. 

Step 2: Bootstrapped Data Genera-tion. Following Sec. 3.1, we collect addi-tional images and feed them into the initial model equipped with the AlloEgo-Adapter trained in Step 1. Because Step 1 employs full-format SFT, the output structure is strongly constrained, enabling the model to gener-ate structured answers directly from images without explicit input queries. We then gen-erate the corresponding questions using the procedure in Sec. 3.3, producing additional 

(image , query , answer ) triplets consistent with the AlloEgo-View format. 

Step 3: Manual Confirmation and Iterative Refinement. The generated triplets undergo manual verification to ensure correctness and natural language quality. The validated triplets are then added to the AlloEgo-View dataset. Finally, Steps 1–3 are iteratively repeated until convergence. In summary, the pipeline progressively expands AlloEgo-View through bootstrapped generation and iteratively fine-tunes AlloEgo-Adapter for robust spatial reasoning. In practice, five iterations are sufficient for stable performance. 

## 4.2 View-Specific Spatial Query Classifier 🔥 Classification Head 

> (2 Linear layers)
> DistilBERT
> Tokenizer
> DistilBERT
> Encoder
> ❄DistilBERT
> Sigmoid
> User Query
> View-Specific
> (Allo/Ego)
> Non-View-
> Specific

Figure 6: Spatial Query Classifier for filtering and categorizing spatial-related user queries. Due to the rigid SFT output format, the adapter-enhanced VLM tends to favor spa-tial responses. To distinguish view-specific (egocentric/allocentric) queries from general ones, we train a lightweight classifier, as il-lustrated in Fig. 6. The query is tokenized using a frozen DistilBERT tokenizer [30] and encoded by a frozen DistilBERT encoder to obtain a latent representation while preserv-ing generalizability. A lightweight classification head with two linear layers then predicts whether the query involves spatial-direction reasoning. We adopt DistilBERT due to its efficiency, compact size, and strong semantic encoding capability. To train the classifier, we construct a question-only dataset, AlloEgo-QO , containing approximately 10K queries without answers. It includes 4K spatial queries from AlloEgo-View and 6K non-spatial queries collected from online sources (e.g., mathematics, finance, and daily tasks). The former are labeled as positive (view-specific) and the latter as negative (non-view-specific). The train–test split ratio is 8:2. During inference, each question is first processed by the Spatial Classifier. If it corresponds to a spatial-direction reasoning task, both the base VLM and AlloEgo-Adapter are invoked; otherwise, only the base VLM is used. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 9

## 4.3 Support for Multi-round Dialogue 

The framework in Fig. 4 supports multi-round dialogue. The conversation history, query image, and current question are fed into the VLM in an autoregressive manner. The invocation of AlloEgo-Adapter is determined by the Spatial Query Classifier. The generated answer, together with the current question, is appended to the dialogue history to preserve contextual information. Subsequent interactions are processed iteratively in the same manner. Since our ultimate goal is robotic deployment, a new dialogue session is initiated whenever the robot observes a new scene. Therefore, in our multi-round setting, the dialogue history contains only previous questions and answers, while the query image is not re-input in subsequent rounds. 

# 5 Experiments 

## 5.1 View-Specific Comparisons                     

> Method Params VAR ↓VSA ↑
> Qwen 2.5-VL 7B 94.568% 50% Llama 3.2-V 11B 100% –Gemma 3-V 4B 99.753% 100% GPT-4o –99.259% 66.666% GPT-4o mini –99.012% 75%

Table 2: Perspective tests of strong VLMs. We integrate different base VLMs into our framework and compare against several state-of-the-art models, including GPT-4o , GPT-4o mini , Llama 3.2-V , Gemma 3-V , and vari-ants of Qwen 2.5-VL . Our evaluation focuses on view awareness and reference-frame dis-ambiguation capability. 

Allocentric-Egocentric View Awareness Test. We select the questions from AlloEgo-View that are spatially ambiguous, meaning no reference frame or perspective is provided. By feeding only these questions to a model without any view-specific format constraints, we aim to assess whether the model possesses sufficient view awareness. Table 2 reports two metrics. The View Ambiguity Rate (VAR) evaluates whether a model’s response introduces confusion (prompt available in the Supplementary Material). VAR measures the proportion of cases where a query lacks reference frame information and the model also omits it, leading to ambiguous interpretations. All models exhibit high ambiguity: Qwen2.5-VL (7B) 94.57%, Llama3.2-V (11B) 100%, and GPT-4o variants above 99%. These results indicate that current models cannot reliably resolve spatial relations without explicit reference frames. The View-Specific Accuracy (VSA) measures how often a model gives the correct answer when its response explicitly includes a reference frame. Because the evaluation set is small, each case is manually verified. Most models show inconsistent performance in this aspect, highlighting the importance of AlloEgo-View, which provides view-specific QA. 

Allo-Egocentric View Disambiguation Test. Table 3 presents a comprehensive com-parison of Llama 3.2-V , Gemma 3-V , variants of Qwen 2.5-VL , GPT-4o , and GPT-4o mini .The first three are further extended with the AlloEgo-Adapter. The test dataset consists of 1K manually annotated samples (refer to Sec. 3). Three evaluation settings are reported: 1. View-Specific Format-Only Prompt (VS-Format): The model receives only the query and the expected output format, without any additional guidance on spatial semantics or structured reasoning. 10 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM                                                                       

> Method Params AD_RO ↑AD_TO ↑Ego ↑Allo ↑
> VS-Format (Qwen 2.5-VL) 7B 4.08 3.62 4.51 2.65 VS-Textbook (Qwen 2.5-VL) 7B 5.22 4.61 5.39 4.16 AlloEgo-VLM (Qwen 2.5-VL) 7B 7.94 8.04 8.19 6.25
> VS-Format (Llama 3.2-V) 11B 3.82 3.53 4.36 3.74 VS-Textbook (Llama 3.2-V) 11B 4.95 4.56 5.03 3.38 AlloEgo-VLM (Llama 3.2-V) 11B 7.92 8.17 8.28 6.72
> VS-Format (Gemma 3-V) 4B 3.59 3.20 1.84 3.94 VS-Textbook (Gemma 3-V) 4B 4.75 4.50 4.89 3.86 AlloEgo-VLM (Gemma 3-V) 4B 5.38 5.76 4.36 4.30
> VS-Format (GPT-4o mini) -4.40 4.16 5.67 4.43 VS-Textbook (GPT-4o mini) -6.32 6.41 7.02 5.27
> VS-Format (GPT-4o) -4.54 4.56 5.95 5.05 VS-Textbook (GPT-4o) -7.25 7.42 7.34 5.91

Table 3: Comparison of disambiguation capability. 2. View-Specific Textbook-Level Prompt (VS-Textbook): The model receives a detailed prompt that instructs it to distinguish between allocentric and egocentric descriptions, avoid ambiguous or contradictory answers, and follow structured spatial reasoning. 3. Proposed SFT: A backbone model adapted through SFT (Sec. 4). We evaluate the key entries highlighted in Fig. 3b and report: AD_RO (Reference Object Absolute Direction), AD_TO (Target Object Absolute Direction), Ego (egocentric), and Allo 

(allocentric). Each entry in the test dataset is annotated with a ground truth. We use GPT-4o 

to score answer–ground-truth similarity from 1 to 10 (see the Supplementary Material). From Table 3, several key observations can be drawn: • Each model shows clear progressive improvement: VS-Format yields moderate per-formance, VS-Textbook brings substantial gains across all metrics, and the full SFT setting achieves the best results (bolded). This trend underscores the contribution of AlloEgo-VLM. Gemma 3-V , due to its smaller parameter size, scores slightly lower on the Ego metric in AlloEgo-VLM compared to VS-Textbook. • When comparing the gray-shaded rows, it is notable that Qwen 2.5-VL (7B) and Llama 3.2-V (11B) , both using our AlloEgo-VLM method, outperform the strongest proprietary baseline, VS-Textbook ( GPT-4o ). • The superior performance of our SFT approach stems from explicit spatial encoding in AlloEgo-View, iterative fine-tuning with human verification, and a structured output format that improves generalization across base models. 

## 5.2 Performance of the Spatial Query Classifier 

The spatial classifier plays a key role in preventing AlloEgo-VLM from overfitting to spatial questions. We evaluate it on the AlloEgo-QO test set, with results summarized in Table 4. We conduct the same experiment on the state-of-the-art VLMs via prompting. Our model achieves perfect accuracy (100%) while maintaining a lightweight design (6M parameters, 0.25GB) and extremely fast inference speed ( ≈2ms). Since this is a relatively simple task, 

Qwen 2.5-VL and Llama 3.2-V also achieve accuracies above 99%, while Gemma 3-V lags CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 11 

behind on this binary decision task. Thus, our lightweight spatial classifier effectively serves its purpose in our setting.                     

> Method Para. Size Inf. Acc.
> Spatial Classifier 6M 0.25GB ≈2ms 100% Qwen 2.5-VL 7B 7GB ≈260ms 99.53% Llama 3.2-V 11B 11GB ≈700ms 99.71% Gemma 3-V 4B 4GB ≈240ms 91.24%

Table 4: Capability for recognizing spa-tial queries.  

> (a) Training set (b) Test set

Figure 7: 3D PCA projection of features en-coded by the Spatial Query Classifier. To examine the learned representations, we visualize the final M3 layer features using 3D PCA [14]. Fig. 7 shows clear separation between the two classes in both training and unseen test data, confirming the learned discriminative features. 

## 5.3 Training Performance of AlloEgo-Adapter 

Figure 8: Progressive training of AlloEgo-Adapter on Qwen 2.5-VL-7B . Line: perfor-mance; bars: dataset size. AlloEgo-Adapter was trained progressively in a multi-stage manner, with each stage gen-erating additional view-specific data for fine-tuning. We selected Qwen 2.5-VL-7B as the backbone, which offers a favorable balance between capacity and performance. Fig. 8 shows its performance trajectory. The model improves steadily in the early stages and begins to plateau after Stage 3. The bar chart illustrates the dataset growth during bootstrapped data generation. At Stage 5, where the training dataset reaches 4K samples, performance stabilizes. These results indicate that AlloEgo-VLM can be effectively trained with a relatively small dataset of 4K samples, achieving performance levels that approach or surpass 8 (out of 10) across the majority of evaluation metrics. 

## 5.4 Embodied Deployment for Open-Ended Spatial Grounding 

To evaluate the practical utility of AlloEgo-VLM in embodied AI, we develop a framework in 

NVIDIA Isaac Sim . We design an open-ended object search task requiring both long-horizon navigation and fine-grained spatial reasoning, following the workflow below: 1. Reference-Centric Navigation. Given a complex spatial instruction (e.g., “find the plant right of the sofa” ), the robot first uses an LLM planner to navigate toward the designated reference object ( sofa ). This step isolates global path planning and focuses the evaluation on local spatial understanding. 2. Perception Triggering. Upon arriving near the sofa , the LLM planner issues a 

call_vlm command, triggering the robot’s onboard RGB camera(s) to actively per-ceive the surrounding scene. 12 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM                                                   

> AQ (implicit allocentric SR) EQ (explicit egocentric SR) Scenario <reference obj> Qwen-For Qwen-Txt AlloEgo Qwen-For Qwen-Txt AlloEgo
> Case 1: Table (Non-directional) 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.0
> Case 2: Sofa (Facing Observer) 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0
> Case 3: Chair (Facing Observer) 0.2 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.9
> Case 4: Chair (Facing Left) 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.6 0.8
> Case 5: Human (Facing Observer) 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.5
> Case 6: Wheelchair (Facing Away) 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.8 1.0 0.7
> Average Success Rate (SR) ↑0.567 0.517 0.783 0.700 0.816 0.816

Table 5: Navigation Success Rate (SR) for embodied search in Isaac Sim experiments. AQ (Ambiguous Queries) evaluate implicit allocentric transformations with unstated reference frames, while EQ (Explicit Queries) serve as an egocentric control benchmark for standard camera-space grounding using the phrase “from your perspective” .3. Candidate Object Localization. To address semantic ambiguity, Grounding DINO identifies all candidate plant instances in the captured images. Red bounding boxes are overlaid as visual prompts, producing multiple prompted images for VLM reasoning. 4. Spatial Reasoning and Grounding. Each image is queried with: “Can you describe where the {target} in the red box is?” . The generated answers are verified by matching their directional and perspective descriptions against the original instruction. The candidate with the highest semantic alignment is selected as the target object. 

Figure 9: Example multi-object scenarios in Isaac Sim for embodied object search tasks. Boxes are positioned in front of and behind the chair (left), while carts are placed on both sides of the human avatar (right). We establish two baselines under differ-ent prompting settings for spatial reasoning: (i) VS-Format (corresponding to Qwen-For in Table 5): evaluation without explicit perspective or coordinate-system instruc-tions, using the standard Qwen 2.5-VL back-bone; (ii) VS-Textbook (corresponding to Qwen-Txt in Table 5): evaluation with zero-shot prompts augmented by textbook-style spatial reasoning demonstrations and structured reference-frame definitions on the 

Qwen 2.5-VL backbone. For AlloEgo-VLM, we adopt Qwen 2.5-VL as the backbone and apply our reference-frame alignment fine-tuning protocol. All methods are integrated into the same robotic pipeline for fair comparison. We conduct closed-loop object search experiments in two high-fidelity NVIDIA Isaac Sim environments containing multiple similar objects: an office scene and a hospital scene (Fig. 9). Within these environments, we design six testing scenarios under two settings: (i) Non-directional References: objects without an intrinsic front, where spatial frames depend entirely on the observer (e.g., symmetrical tables); (ii) Directional References: 

objects with clear intrinsic fronts that support allocentric reference frames (e.g., sofas and wheelchairs). Table 5 summarizes the six scenarios. For each scenario, the robot performs a spatial disambiguation task using either ambiguous queries (e.g., “Find the table right of the wheelchair” ) or explicitly constrained egocentric queries (e.g., “Find the cart left of CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 13 

the human from your perspective” ). Each case is evaluated over 10 independent trials with randomized starting locations, resulting in diverse stopping positions, viewing distances, and camera angles to rigorously assess reference-frame stability. We report the Navigation Success Rate (SR) in Table 5. A trial is considered successful only if it satisfies two criteria: (i) Perceptual Grounding : the VLM correctly identifies the target object while filtering out distractors through alignment verification; and (ii) Physical Arrival : the robot autonomously navigates to within 1 .5 m of the target object. Failure to satisfy either criterion is counted as a failure. The overall SR across all trials yields two key takeaways. First, under the ambiguous-query condition, which inherently requires allocentric reference-frame mapping, AlloEgo-VLM achieves a substantial performance gain with an average SR of 0.783, outperforming the baseline Qwen-For (0.567) and the prompted Qwen-Txt (0.517). Second, the results under the explicit-query control condition demonstrate the architectural stability of our framework. When evaluated with explicit egocentric directives (e.g., standard camera-space left/right reasoning), AlloEgo-VLM maintains a stable average SR of 0.816. To elucidate the geometric factors behind these macroscopic metrics, we provide a case-by-case analysis of Table 5. Case 1 represents Symmetrical Objects . In layouts containing radially symmetrical entities such as tables, the absence of an intrinsic front removes spatial directionality. For example, given the query “Find the sofa right of the table,” the baselines default to camera-space right, whereas AlloEgo-VLM may project a virtual orientation onto the object. Since both egocentric and allocentric interpretations are acceptable, all tested models achieve similarly high success rates. Cases 2–5 represent Asymmetrical/Directional Objects , where AlloEgo-VLM demon-strates a clear advantage, except in Case 4. For entities with intrinsic orientation (e.g., sofas or chairs), our model dynamically infers their facing direction instead of relying solely on image-plane reasoning. While the baselines suffer from geometric confusion when objects directly face the robot, AlloEgo-VLM successfully decouples the observer viewpoint from the object-centric frame, enabling robust coordinate transformation. The performance drop in Case 4 (Fig. 9, left) is primarily driven by the visual ambiguity of a lateral view. When a chair faces directly sideways relative to the robot’s camera, the spatial asymmetry between its left and right sides becomes visually compressed and partially occluded. This lack of distinct directional features makes it highly challenging for the model to reliably anchor the object’s intrinsic coordinate axes, occasionally leading to minor frame alignment errors. Case 5 presents a challenging human-avatar scenario with strong backlighting and the complex non-rigid structure of the human body (Fig. 9, right). In the AQ experiments, all models perform poorly, while AlloEgo-VLM achieves a slightly higher SR of 0.4. This bottleneck suggests that tracking highly articulated human-centric reference frames under randomized camera viewpoints and varying ambient lighting remains a major challenge for embodied spatial intelligence. For example, even a slight change in human orientation can make it difficult to determine whether an object lies to the right or front-right of the person. Case 6 reveals a geometric edge case related to viewpoint alignment. When the robot approaches the wheelchair from a strict rear view, the baseline models perform robustly because their egocentric axes coincidentally align with the object’s global geometry, rather than through effective reference-frame transformation. Conversely, although AlloEgo-VLM incorporates explicit frame-transformation reasoning, certain viewing distances or angles can obscure the subtle visual cues that indicate the object’s intrinsic orientation, resulting in a slightly lower SR. 14 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

## 5.5 Additional Experiments 

Additional experiments are summarized below; see the Supplementary Material for details. 

5.5.1 Emergent Robustness Against Out-of-Distribution Inputs 

During the early training stages of AlloEgo-Adapter, we observed an intriguing vulnerability to out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, specifically when queried about non-existing objects within an image or when prompted with pure text during simulated camera failures. Under these anomalous conditions, models trained on fewer than 2K samples exhibited rigid format imitation, blindly fabricating hallucinated descriptions to satisfy the structured spatial template without grounding. In practical robotic deployments, such unverified compliance could lead to catastrophic actions based on fabricated perceptions. Crucially, as training progressed into Stage 3 (exceeding 2K samples), Qwen 2.5-VL-7B [28] exhibited strong emergent capabilities. Without any explicit architectural modifi-cations or targeted OOD supervision, the model spontaneously learned to identify missing objects and appropriately handle pure-text queries. This pivot from rote structural mimicry to genuine spatial reasoning demonstrates that robust format alignment, when supported by sufficient data scale, fosters true semantic generalization rather than mere surface-level memorization. 

5.5.2 Structured Response Design Principles 

Our structured answer format is consistently applied across AlloEgo-View to reduce view ambiguity. People may unconsciously adopt different reference frames due to variations in cognitive psychology and cultural background, leading to inconsistent spatial reasoning. Through experiments, we validate the following principles, which help ensure consistent and view-aware responses under a unified framework. • Global Context: Begin with an overall image description to establish a coherent understanding before detailed reasoning. • Absolute Directions: Provide <Ref Abs Dir> and <Tgt Abs Dir> to clarify relative directions and improve consistency in both egocentric and allocentric views. • Object Positions: Specify <Ref Pos> and <Tgt Pos> to avoid ambiguities when objects appear at distant image boundaries. • Egocentric Grounding: Use phrasing explicitly tied to the observer’s perspective (e.g., “In the image, . . . ”) to anchor reasoning. • Depth Ordering: Replace ambiguous front–back terms with explicit relational state-ments (e.g., “between the observer and . . . ”) to reduce 3D ambiguity. • Allocentric Grounding: Define allocentric relations with respect to the reference object’s intrinsic orientation when available; otherwise, avoid assigning object-centered directions to non-directional objects. • Simplified Labeling: Avoid labels such as “looking back,” which may vary across cultural or individual interpretations. • Non-directional Objects: Use objects without intrinsic orientation (e.g., balls, plants, fruits) for egocentric relations only, and avoid treating them as allocentric reference objects. • Geographic Directions: Exclude absolute geographic references (e.g., north, south, east, west) as they lie outside the scope of this work. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 15 

# 6 Conclusions 

In this work, we address spatial semantic ambiguity in VLMs by distinguishing allocentric and egocentric reference frames. We introduce a structured spatial representation framework, the AlloEgo-View dataset, and a multi-stage QLoRA-based fine-tuning pipeline, collectively enabling AlloEgo-VLM with strong spatial disambiguation capability. Experimental results show that AlloEgo-VLM substantially outperforms state-of-the-art models, including GPT-4o , Llama 3.2-Vision , and Gemma 3-Vision , on spatial reasoning tasks. Notably, Qwen 2.5-VL-7B trained on sufficiently large datasets exhibits emergent capabilities, such as detecting missing objects and correctly answering pure text queries, while maintaining strong performance across diverse query types. Our findings highlight the importance of dataset scale and structured supervision for robust spatial reasoning. Unlike memory-intensive 

MoE approaches [12], our lightweight classifier introduces minimal overhead, enabling more reliable deployment in embodied AI and robotics. 

# References 

[1] Andrew Alexander. Switching between egocentric and allocentric coordinates. Interview (Q&A) at Sainsbury Wellcome Centre Seminar, 2023. [2] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2020. [3] Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brian Ichter, Dorsa Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia. Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 14455–14465, 2024. [4] An-Chieh Cheng, Hongxu Yin, Yang Fu, et al. Spatialrgpt: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01584 , 2024. [5] Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony D. Bagdanov, et al. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [6] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [7] Flavia Filimon. Are all spatial reference frames egocentric? reinterpreting evidence for allocentric, object-centered, or world-centered reference frames. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 9:648, 2015. [8] Google DeepMind. Gemma 3-v: Google’s multimodal vision-language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 , 2025. [9] Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 16 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

[10] Gabriele Janzen, Daniel B. M. Haun, and Stephen C. Levinson. Tracking down abstract linguistic meaning: Neural correlates of spatial frame of reference ambiguities in language. PLoS ONE , 7(2):e30657, 2012. [11] Binbin Ji, Siddharth Agrawal, Qiance Tang, and Yvonne Wu. Enhancing spatial rea-soning in vision-language models via chain-of-thought prompting and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13362 , 2025. [12] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, and et al. Mixtral of experts, 1 2024. arXiv:2401.04088 [cs.LG]. [13] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017. [14] Ian T. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis . Springer, 2nd edition, 2002. [15] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02643 , 2023. [16] Phillip Y. Lee, Jihyeon Je, Chanho Park, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Leonidas Guibas, and Minhyuk Sung. Perspective-aware reasoning in vision-language models via mental imagery simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17207 , 2025. [17] Stephen C. Levinson. Reference frames in language and cognition: Cross-population mismatches. In Reference frames in language and cognition: cross-population mis-matches . De Gruyter, 2022. [18] Dingming Li, Hongxing Li, Zixuan Wang, Yuchen Yan, Hang Zhang, Siqi Chen, Guiyang Hou, Shengpei Jiang, Wenqi Zhang, Yongliang Shen, Weiming Lu, and Yuet-ing Zhuang. Viewspatial-bench: Evaluating multi-perspective spatial localization in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21500 , 2025. [19] Yuan-Hong Liao, Rafid Mahmood, Sanja Fidler, and David Acuña. Reasoning paths with reference objects elicit quantitative spatial reasoning in large vision-language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.09788 , 2024. [20] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ra-manan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. [21] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [22] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Zhang, Hang Su, Junjie Zhu, Xiaogang Du, Lei Zhang, and Mike Zheng Shou. Ground-ing dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499 , 2023. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 17 

[23] A. Majid, M. Bowerman, S. Kita, D. B. Haun, and S. C. Levinson. Can language restructure cognition? the case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 2004. discusses spatial FoR differences across languages. [24] Meta AI. Llama 3.2-v: Meta’s multimodal vision-language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12345 , 2024. [25] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [26] Renato Orti, Tina Iachini, Eleonora D’Agostino, Francesco Ruotolo, and Gennaro Ruggiero. Cognitive load in switching between egocentric and allocentric spatial frames of reference: a pupillometry study. Scientific Reports , 2025. [27] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [28] Qwen Team. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. CoRR abs/2502.13923, arXiv, February 2025. Introduces the Qwen2.5-VL vision-language model series (3B, 7B, 72B), featuring window attention, dynamic FPS sampling, and enhanced temporal reasoning. The 7B-parameter model balances speed and performance in multimodal tasks. [29] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. CoRR , abs/2305.18290, 2023. [30] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 ,2019. [31] Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem, Pushmeet Kohli, and Rob Fergus. Indoor segmentation and support inference from rgbd images. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 746–760. Springer, 2012. [32] Ilias Stogiannidis, Steven McDonagh, and Sotirios A. Tsaftaris. Mind the gap: Bench-marking spatial reasoning in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19707 ,2025. [33] Stefanie Tellex, Thomas Kollar, Steven Dickerson, Matthew R Walter, Siddhartha Banerjee, Seth Teller, and Nicholas Roy. Understanding natural language commands for robotic navigation and mobile manipulation. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2011. [34] Ao Wang, Hui Chen, Lihao Liu, Kai Chen, Zijia Lin, Jungong Han, and Guiguang Ding. Yolov10: Real-time end-to-end object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14458 ,2024. [35] Jiayu Wang, Yifei Ming, Zhenmei Shi, Vibhav Vineet, Xin Wang, Yixuan Li, and Neel Joshi. Is a picture worth a thousand words? delving into spatial reasoning for vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14852 , 2024. 18 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

[36] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, et al. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. [37] Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Anjali W. Gupta, Li Fei-Fei, and Saining Xie. Thinking in space: How multimodal large language models see, remember, and recall spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14171 , 2024. [38] Kaiyu Yang, Olga Russakovsky, and Jia Deng. Spatialsense: An adversarially crowd-sourced benchmark for spatial relation recognition. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2019. [39] Jiahui Zhang, Yurui Chen, Yanpeng Zhou, Yueming Xu, Ze Huang, Jilin Mei, Junhui Chen, Yu-Jie Yuan, Xinyue Cai, Guowei Huang, Xingyue Quan, Hang Xu, and Li Zhang. From flatland to space: Teaching vision-language models to perceive and reason in 3d. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22976v1 , 2025. [40] Wenyu Zhang, Wei En Ng, Lixin Ma, Yuwen Wang, Junqi Zhao, Allison Koenecke, Boyang Li, and Lu Wang. Sphere: Unveiling spatial blind spots in vision-language models through hierarchical evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12693 , 2024. [41] Zheyuan Zhang, Fengyuan Hu, Jayjun Lee, Freda Shi, Parisa Kordjamshidi, Joyce Chai, and Ziqiao Ma. Do vision-language models represent space and how? evaluating spatial frame of reference under ambiguities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17385 , 2024. [42] Shijie Zhou, Alexander Vilesov, Xuehai He, Ziyu Wan, Shuwang Zhang, Aditya Nagachandra, Di Chang, Dongdong Chen, Xin Eric Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Vlm4d: Towards spatiotemporal awareness in vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02095 , 2025. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 19 

# A Appendix 

## A.1 Prompt for RGB Image Selection 

The prompt for RGB image selection in Sec. 3.1 is shown below: 

Prompt: Please determine whether the image meets the following criteria: 1. The image contains approximately 2 to 6 distinct, identifiable objects or entities. 2. The background is relatively clean and uncluttered. 3. The scene could potentially lead to referential ambiguity in natural language descrip-tions due to varied perspectives or viewpoints. These images will be used to generate question-answer pairs related to referential ambiguity. Respond only with “Yes” or “No.” 

## A.2 Prompt for Structured Spatial Answer Generation 

To generate the initial structured spatial answer (Step 1) in Sec. 3.2, we employ GPT-4o with the following prompt: 

Prompt: Please follow the instructions below to describe the direction and spatial relationship between two objects: 1. Overall Image Description: Based on the visual content of the image, provide a comprehensive description of the entire scene, including: • The overall setting and background context (e.g., indoor/outdoor, urban/natural environment). • The number and types of visible objects (e.g., people, vehicles, buildings, furni-ture). • The spatial distribution and relative positions of objects within the scene (e.g., clustered on the left, evenly spread across the image). • Any prominent visual structures or compositional features that help define the spatial layout (e.g., roads, walls, floor lines, depth cues in the background). 2. Reference Object Absolute Orientation: 

• Do not compare it to any other object. • Only describe its own directional properties. • Use absolute terms such as: “facing left”, “facing right”, “facing upward”, “facing downward”, “facing the observer”, “facing away from the observer”, or “this object has no inherent direction”. • An object is considered to have inherent directionality if its front, back, left, or right side can be visually inferred from its shape, posture, or design (e.g., a person, car, or animal). Objects like chairs or cups may have direction depending on their orientation. If no such direction is visually evident, state “this object has no inherent direction”. 3. Target Object Absolute Orientation: 

• Same rules as the Reference Object: do not compare to any other object and only describe its own directionality. 20 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

4. Relative Position of the Target Object with Respect to the Reference Object: 

• If at least one of the two objects has directionality, provide both Egocentric and 

Allocentric perspectives. • If neither of the two objects has directionality, provide Egocentric only. • Egocentric Description (Observer-Centered): 

(a) Treat both the Reference Object and the Target Object as 2D bounding boxes in screen space. (b) Think of the image as a nine-square grid. Describe their individual screen positions using: “upper left”, “upper center”, “upper right”, “center left”, “center”, “center right”, “lower left”, “lower center”, “lower right”. (c) Describe their relative screen positions using: “<Target Object> is at the same position as the 

<Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is above the 

<Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is below the 

<Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is to the left of the <Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is to the right of the <Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is to the upper left of the <Reference Object> ”, “<Target Object> is to the lower left of the <Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is to the upper right of the 

<Reference Object> ”, “ <Target Object> is to the lower right of the <Reference Object> ”. (d) If a depth relationship is visible (occlusion or perspective cues), indicate: “<Target Object> is between the observer and the <Reference Object> ”, “ <Reference Object> is closer to the observer than the <Target Object> ”, or “ <Target Object> is far-ther from the observer than the <Reference Object> ”. • Allocentric Description (Reference Object-Centered): 

(a) Use the orientation of the Reference Object to describe the location of the Target Object. (b) Use spatial terms such as: in front of, behind, to the left of, to the right of, diagonally front-left, etc. 5. Response Format: 

• Overall Image Description: <Overall Image Description> 

• Reference Object: <Reference Object> 

• Target Object: <Target Object> 

• Reference Object Absolute Direction: <Reference Object> is facing 

<Direction> 

• Target Object Absolute Direction: <Target Object> is facing 

<Direction> 

• Perspective: Egocentric (from the observer’s point of view) • Answer: The <Reference Object> is on the <Position> of the image, the <Target Object> is on the <Position> of the image, and in the image, <Target Object> is <Direction> <Reference Object> .• Perspective: Allocentric (from the <Reference Object> ’s point of view) CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 21 

• Answer: From the <Reference Object> ’s perspective, the <Target Object> is <Direction> of the <Reference Object> .

Example 1: 

Overall Image Description : The image shows a heartwarming scene of a golden retriever lying on the floor next to a gray and white cat. The cat is gently nuzzling the dog’s face, creating a sense of affection between the two pets. In front of them is a white bowl, likely containing food, suggesting they might be sharing a meal. The setting appears to be a cozy indoor space with white cabinets, shelves with books or papers, and a light-colored floor. 

Reference Object : Dog 

Target Object : Cat 

Reference Object Absolute Direction : The dog is facing the observer 

Target Object Absolute Direction : The cat is facing left 

Perspective : Egocentric (from the observer’s point of view) 

Answer : The dog is on the left middle of the image, the cat is on the right middle of the image, and in the image, cat is to the right of dog. 

Perspective : Allocentric (from the Dog’s point of view) 

Answer : From the dog’s perspective, the cat is on its right side. 

Example 2: 

Overall Image Description : This image shows two plastic buckets placed on a smooth, light-colored surface. The bucket in the foreground is blue with a white handle, while the bucket behind it is red, also with a white handle. The blue bucket is positioned slightly to the left and in front of the red one, creating a clear sense of depth and perspective. The scene appears to be well-lit, likely photographed indoors or in a shaded outdoor setting. The overall composition is simple and minimalistic. 

Reference Object : Red bucket 

Target Object : Blue bucket 

Reference Object Absolute Direction : The red bucket has no inherent direction 

Target Object Absolute Direction : The blue bucket has no inherent direction 

Perspective : Egocentric (from the observer’s point of view) 

Answer : The red bucket is on the upper right of the image, the blue bucket is on the center left of the image, and in the image, the red bucket is to the upper right of the blue bucket. 

Perspective : Allocentric (from the red bucket’s point of view) 

Answer : No Allocentric. 

## A.3 Examples of Spatial Answers 

In the following, we present the preliminary answer generated by GPT-4o for the example shown in Fig. 3. 

Overall Image Description : The image shows an indoor setting with two people. A man in a boxing stance is on the left, and a woman holding a wine glass is on the right. They are standing in front of a door, with some office equipment visible on the left side of the image. The room appears to be well-lit, with a neutral-colored wall and floor. 

Reference Object : The man in a boxing stance 

Target Object : The woman holding a wine glass 22 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

Reference Object Absolute Direction : The man in a boxing stance is facing the observer 

Target Object Absolute Direction : The woman holding a wine glass is facing the observer 

Perspective : Egocentric (from the observer’s point of view) 

Answer : The man in a boxing stance is on the left of the image, the woman holding a wine glass is on the right of the image, and in the image, the woman holding a wine glass is to the right of the man in a boxing stance. 

Perspective : Allocentric (from the man in a boxing stance’s point of view) 

Answer : From the man in a boxing stance’s perspective, the woman holding a wine glass is to his right. The preliminary answer above is then refined through the steps described in Sec. 3.2. Specifically, the orange-highlighted parts are corrected in Step 2, the yellow-highlighted parts are added in Step 3, and the blue-highlighted parts are manually corrected in Step 4: 

Overall Image Description : The image shows an indoor setting with two people. A man in a boxing stance is on the left, and a woman holding a wine glass is on the right. They are standing in front of a door, with some office equipment visible on the left side of the image. The room appears to be well-lit, with a neutral-colored wall and floor. 

Reference Object : The man in a boxing stance 

Target Object : The woman holding a wine glass 

Reference Object Absolute Direction : The man in a boxing stance is facing the observer 

Target Object Absolute Direction : The woman holding a wine glass is facing the observer 

Perspective : Egocentric (from the observer’s point of view) 

Answer : The man in a boxing stance is on the center left of the image, the woman holding a wine glass is on the center right of the image, and in the image, the woman holding a wine glass is to the right of the man in a boxing stance. The man in a boxing stance is between the observer and the woman holding a wine glass. 

Perspective : Allocentric (from the man in a boxing stance’s point of view) 

Answer : From the man in a boxing stance’s perspective, the woman holding a wine glass is to his back left. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 23 

## A.4 PosDir Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 Grid-Based Spatial Relation Extraction 

Require: Reference object bounding box BBOX r = ( xr1, yr1, xr2, yr2), Target object bounding box BBOX t = ( xt1, yt1, xt2, yt2), Grid indices grids ⊆ { 1, . . . , 9}

Ensure: Description of the reference object dr, Description of the target object dt , Relative relation drel 

1: Determine the grid index set gr ⊆ grids covered by the rectangle BBOX r =(xr1, yr1, xr2, yr2)

2: Determine the grid index set gt ⊆ grids covered by the rectangle BBOX t =(xt1, yt1, xt2, yt2)

3: if gr = /0 or gt = /0 then 

4: dr ← “Unknown”, dt ← “Unknown” 

5: else 

6: Look up the corresponding description for gr in Table 6, assign to dr

7: Look up the corresponding description for gt in Table 6, assign to dt

8: end if 

9: Compute the center of the reference object bounding box (xr, yr) ←   xr1+xr2 

> 2

, yr1+yr2

> 2



10: Compute the center of the target object bounding box (xt , yt ) ←   xt1+xt2 

> 2

, yt1+yt2

> 2



11: ∆x ← xt − xr

12: if |∆x| > γ then 

13: if ∆x > 0 then 

14: drel ← “Right” 

15: else 

16: drel ← “Left” 

17: end if 

18: end if 

19: return (dr, dt , drel )

Grid set grids Description d

[2] / [4] / [5] / [6] / [8] Top / Left / Center / Right / Bottom 

[1] / [3] Top-left / Top-right 

[7] / [9] Bottom-left / Bottom-right 

[1, 2], [1, 4] / [2, 3], [3, 6] Top-left / Top-right 

[4, 7], [7, 8] / [6, 9], [8, 9] Bottom-left / Bottom-right 

[2, 5] / [5, 8] Upper-center / Lower-center 

[4, 5] / [5, 6] Left-center / Right-center 

[1, 2, 3] / [7, 8, 9] Top / Bottom 

[4, 5, 6], [2, 5, 8] Center 

[1, 4, 7] / [3, 6, 9] Left /Right 

[1, 2, 4, 5] / [2, 3, 5, 6] Upper-left-center / Upper-right-center 

[4, 5, 7, 8] / [5, 6, 8, 9] Lower-left-center / Lower-right-center 

[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] / [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] Upper-center / Lower-center 

[1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8] / [2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9] Left-center /Right-center 

[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] Center 

Table 6: Mapping rules between grid sets and spatial descriptions 24 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

## A.5 DepOrd Algorithm 

Algorithm 2 Depth-Based Relative Position Description 

Require: Depth values of Reference object Dr = {dr1, dr2, . . . , drn }, Depth values of Target object Dt = {dt1, dt2, . . . , dtm }, Threshold γ

Ensure: Description of spatial depth ordering desc  

> 1:

Compute the average depth of the Reference object: ¯Dr ← 1

n

> n

# ∑

> i=1

dri  

> 2:

Compute the average depth of the Target object: ¯Dt ← 1

m

> m

# ∑

> i=1

dti  

> 3:

Compute depth difference: ∆D ← ¯Dr − ¯Dt 

> 4:

if ∆D > γ then  

> 5:

desc ← “<Target Object> is between the observer and the <Reference Object>. ” 

> 6:

Optionally add:  

> 7:

“<Reference Object> is farther to the observer than the <Target Object>. ” 

> 8:

“<Target Object> is closer from the observer than the <Reference Object>. ” 

> 9:

else if ∆D < −γ then  

> 10:

desc ← “<Reference Object> is between the observer and the <Target Object>. ” 

> 11:

Optionally add:  

> 12:

“<Target Object> is farther to the observer than the <Reference Object>. ” 

> 13:

“<Reference Object> is closer from the observer than the <Target Object>. ” 

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

return desc 

## A.6 Spatial Query Template List 

In Sec. 3.3, we use 17 predefined templates to generate spatial queries that are consistent yet diverse. These templates are listed below: 1. Where is the <Target Object> in relation to the <Reference Object> ?2. How are the <Target Object> and <Reference Object> positioned? 3. Can you describe where the <Target Object> is? 4. How would you describe the position of the <Target Object> compared to the 

<Reference Object> ?5. What is the location of the <Target Object> relative to the <Reference Object> ?CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 25 

6. Where would you say the <Target Object> is placed? 7. Tell me how the <Target Object> and the <Reference Object> are arranged. 8. If someone asked you where the <Target Object> is, what would you say? 9. Where is the <Target Object> located with respect to the <Reference Object> ?10. What is the spatial relationship between the <Target Object> and the 

<Reference Object> ?11. Can you point out where the <Target Object> is compared to the <Reference Object> ?12. Where do you see the <Target Object> ?13. What is the position of the <Target Object> in relation to the other object? 14. Where does the <Target Object> appear to be? 15. Which side of the <Reference Object> is the <Target Object> on? 16. How would you explain where the <Target Object> is to someone else? 17. Looking at the scene, where is the <Target Object> ?

## A.7 Prompt for View Ambiguity Rate Test 

In Table 2, the View Ambiguity Rate (VAR) is evaluated using GPT-4o with the following prompt. 

Prompt: Determine whether the following response contains a Reference frame. Rule: If the response includes the phrase “from the perspective of ...” (or similar wording), answer “yes”. Otherwise, answer “no”. Only output “yes” or “no”—no extra text. 

## A.8 Prompt for Automated Model Scoring 

In Table 3, the four metrics AD_RO, AD_TO, Ego, and Allo are evaluated using GPT-4o with the following prompt: 

Prompt: 

You are a semantic evaluation expert. Assistant Response: {AR["answers"][i]} Ground Truth Answer: {GT["answers"][i]} Evaluate their similarity in four specific aspects: 1. Reference Object Absolute Direction Score: X / 10 

• Assess how accurately the Reference Object Absolute Direction in the Assistant Response matches the Ground Truth Answer. • Consider semantic correctness, direction consistency, and clarity. 2. Target Object Absolute Direction Score: X / 10 

• Assess how accurately the Target Object Absolute Direction in the Assistant Response matches the Ground Truth Answer. • Consider semantic correctness, direction consistency, and clarity. 3. Egocentric Answer Score: X / 10 26 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

• Assess how accurately the Egocentric answer in the Assistant Response matches the Ground Truth Answer. • Consider whether the spatial relationship and positional details match. 4. Allocentric Answer Score: X / 10 

• Assess how accurately the Allocentric answer in the Assistant Response matches the Ground Truth Answer. • Consider whether the description from the reference object’s perspective is se-mantically correct and consistent. For each category, score from 1 to 10 (10 = completely accurate and aligned; 1 = entirely incorrect). Then, for each category, provide a clear explanation of your reasoning, addressing: • Whether meanings align • Whether any important details are missing or incorrect • Whether the response is misleading • Clarity of expression 

Output Format: 

Reference Object Absolute Direction Score: X / 10 Explanation: ... Target Object Absolute Direction Score: X / 10 Explanation: ... Egocentric Answer Score: X / 10 Explanation: ... Allocentric Answer Score: X / 10 Explanation: ... 

## A.9 Experiments with Various Inputs 

In these experiments, we feed various queries to our model and make observations. • When given an input image and a question about an object absent from the image, AlloEgo-VLM (with Qwen2.5-VL as the backbone) trained on a sufficiently large dataset (after training stage 3 in Fig. 8) correctly identifies the object’s absence (high-lighted in yellow in Fig. 9(a)). In contrast, the model trained on an insufficient dataset (before stage 3) responds solely based on the visible content, disregarding the query (shown in red in Fig. 9(a)). • When given only textual input without an accompanying image, the model trained on a sufficiently large dataset accurately answers the question and explicitly acknowledges the lack of visual input (highlighted in yellow in Fig. 9(b)). In contrast, the model trained on an insufficient dataset hallucinates, generating fabricated content unrelated to the question (shown in red in Fig. 9(b)), revealing its tendency to produce ungrounded responses without visual context. CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 27 

(a) The queried object is not present in the input image. 

(b) No image input. 

Figure 10: Examples of emergent reasoning in AlloEgo-VLM (with Qwen2.5-VL as the backbone). Behaviors after and before training stage 3 are shown. 

## A.10 Structured Answer Format Design Principle 

Here, we explain our design principle of the structured answer format. 1. Global Context (Overall Image Description): Inspired by Chain-of-Thought [11] reasoning (e.g., having a language model write out detailed calculations improves accuracy on math tasks), we require the model to provide an overall description of the image at the beginning. This helps the model understand the global structure and context before proceeding to detailed reasoning. 2. Absolute Directions <Ref Abs Dir> and <Tgt Abs Dir> : Providing the abso-lute directions of the reference and target objects not only helps models better under-stand their spatial relationships in the image, but also improves the accuracy of sub-sequent egocentric and allocentric view descriptions. These absolute directions are crucial for correctly inferring relative directions. 3. Object Positions ( <Ref Pos> and <Tgt Pos> ): Specifying object positions is crucial when the two objects are far apart in the image. For example, if a man is at the 28 CHEN ET AL.: ALLOEGO-VLM 

left boundary and a woman at the right boundary, explicit position information is essen-tial; otherwise, describing their relationship <Ego Rel Dir> becomes practically infeasible. Including positions is therefore indispensable to avoid such ambiguities. 4. Egocentric Grounding: Even though the egocentric view is initially prompted with “from the observer’s point of view,” it is necessary to explicitly instruct the model to phrase answers like “In the image, ...” when resolving <Ego Rel Dir> . This step is essential to ensure that all reasoning is firmly anchored in the observer’s visual perspective. 5. Depth Ordering: If Step 3 (Depth Enhancement) is not implemented, ambiguities will arise. In an image, vertical relations (up–down) pose no ambiguity due to physical constraints. However, the remaining relations—front–back and left–right—are prone to ambiguity. Step 2 already resolves the 2D left–right issue, while Step 3 specifically addresses the 3D depth (front–back) relation to avoid such problems. Here, we adopt expressions such as “The <Ref Obj> is between the observer and the <Tgt Obj> ”or “The <Tgt Obj> is farther from the observer than the <Ref Obj> ,” instead of simply saying “in front” or “behind.” For example, if the red bucket is in front of the blue bucket, the ambiguity arises because, even from an egocentric viewpoint, cultural backgrounds may differ: some people consider objects closer to the observer as being “in front,” while others regard them as “behind.” Another example is: “The man is facing the observer, the woman is facing away from the observer, and the man is in front of the woman.” In this case, it is also unclear whether the man is actually closer to the observer or the woman is closer, leading to ambiguity. 6. Allocentric Challenges: There is currently no effective solution for allocentric view descriptions, and no model can accurately and reliably label them. Many objects cannot have their orientation directly defined from RGBD images—for example, a sofa, a monitor, or a microwave. Even if these objects inherently lack a clear orientation, humans tend to infer their direction based on usage context. Existing VLMs perform poorly in this regard because they have not been trained with knowledge of “contextually defined orientation” during usage. This also highlights a key challenge addressed in this paper: not all cases can rely on tools to label data for improving VLM capabilities, which further validates the significance of our contribution. 7. Simplifying Labeling: During the labeling process, we tried to avoid overly complex scenarios—for example, when a person is “looking back.” In such cases, it is difficult to define whether the person is facing toward or away from the observer, as interpretations can vary across individuals and cultures. Therefore, we excluded images of this type to keep the absolute direction as simple and consistent as possible. In the process of creating this dataset, similar issues may arise frequently. While some tasks may have clear definitions in spatial studies or cognitive psychology, here we rely solely on humans’ intuitive understanding of direction. This remains a problem worth addressing in the future, with the potential for clearer definitions. 8. Non-directional Objects: Some objects (e.g., soccer balls, potted plants, stones, fruits) have no intrinsic orientation and are excluded from direction annotation. 9. Geographic Directions: Absolute geographic directions (e.g., north, south, east, west) are beyond the scope of this work.