Title: Slow Brain, Fast Planner: Latency-Resilient VLM-Augmented Urban Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.20458v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 01:21:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Slow Brain, Fast Planner: Latency-Resilient VLM-Augmented Urban Navigation 

Zhenghao “Mark” Peng ∗

Amazon FAR 

Honglin He 

UCLA 

Quanyi Li 

Independent 

Yukai Ma ∗

Zhejiang University 

Bolei Zhou 

UCLA 

Abstract: Learning-based planners for sidewalk navigation can generate diverse candidate trajectories in real time, yet their scoring functions often fail to select the best trajectory in challenging situations, outputting trajectories that make the mobile robot drive onto grass, toward pedestrians, or in the wrong direction, even when better candidates exist in the same set. We call this the trajectory scoring gap : in real-world sidewalk navigation, the gap between an anchor-based plan-ner’s top choice and the best possible candidate is substantial, likely due to limited high-level scene understanding capability of the planner. Rather than replacing the planner with an end-to-end Vision-Language-Action model, we propose a VLM-Planner interface that uses a VLM to select a candidate index from the planner’s proposal set and then fuse it with the planner’s initial output. However, VLMs take 1–3s per query and so cannot directly drive a 5–20Hz control loop. We con-tribute a training-free, latency-resilient trajectory-level fusion layer that turns a stale VLM selection into real-time planner scoring via geometric similarity with exponential decay. On ∼2,000 challenging real-world scenarios (e.g., junctions, pedestrian encounters), VLM selection achieves 30% ADE reduction versus the planner’s best selection, while the planner remains competitive in routine situa-tions. In simulation, Score Fusion maintains >80% success rate with delays up to 5s. We demonstrate the full system on a mobile robot navigating challenging campus sidewalks with varied network latency. 

Keywords: Urban Navigation, Vision Language Models 

1 Introduction 

Mobile robots navigating unstructured urban environments such as sidewalks, campuses, plazas need both reactive control and semantic understanding. Learning-based local planners [1, 2, 3] cover the reactive side well: at 5–20 Hz they generate diverse, dynamically feasible candidate trajectories that respect the robot’s kinematics and stay collision-free. What they struggle with is which candidate to execute when several look feasible. Ranking candidates for execution, i.e. the trajectory scoring problem, remains an active research area [4, 5, 6, 7]. Current approaches typically train scoring functions on geometric losses (trajectory similarity, collision proxies, smoothness) or learn from im-itation data. However, these methods inherit fundamental limitations in scene understanding: they lack the semantic reasoning required to interpret ambiguous situations, such as distinguishing among equally viable paths at junctions, understanding social norms governing pedestrian behaviors, or rec-ognizing terrain boundaries. We quantify this “scoring gap” on our ∼2,000 semantically challenging real-world scenarios as shown in Fig. 2: the planner’s top choice achieves 1.64 m ADE, while the oracle-best candidate in the same set achieves 0.39 m, a gap of 1.25 m of recoverable performance already inside the planner’s output. A VLM selector closes 30% of this gap on the hard split while remaining competitive with the planner on routine scenarios. The problem is not generation. It is context-dependent selection. 

> ∗

Work done while at UCLA.     

> arXiv:2606.20458v1 [cs.RO] 18 Jun 2026 Robot
> Off -the-shelf
> Vision-Language-Model
> Local Planner Candidate Fusion
> Delayed
> Feedback
> VLM Interface
> 5HZ 0.5~1HZ
> t=0 t=2s
> Delayed VLM Traj.
> (received at t=2s)
> Planner Traj.
> (executed) How to fuse?

Figure 1: Slow Brain, Fast Planner. A fast planner generates dynamically feasible candidates and a slow VLM selects among them. Score Fusion blends the stale VLM choice into the planner’s real-time scoring via geometric similarity with exponential decay, en-abling continuous control. Closing this scoring gap requires a source of high-level scene understanding. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are a good candidate: they can read scene con-text, understand social norms, and rea-son about ambiguous situations. Recent navigation work has therefore tried to in-ject VLMs into the control loop, most prominently through end-to-end Vision-Language-Action models [8, 9, 10, 11] that fine-tune a VLM to output actions di-rectly. A more conservative line keeps the planner and uses an off-the-shelf VLM only to select among the planner’s own candidates: PIVOT [12] prompts a VLM with candidate annotations overlaid on the image for manipulation and navigation; VL-TGS [13] generates outdoor trajectory candidates and lets a VLM pick the best one for sidewalk-following on wheeled robots. What both lines share, however, is a control-rate problem. VLM inference takes 1–2 s, orders of magnitude too slow for the 5–20 Hz loop the robot actually runs at. Existing systems handle this latency in three ways: (i) execute the stale VLM trajectory directly until the next response (unsafe under dynamic obstacles), (ii) decimate the VLM to low frequency and hand intermediate commands to a low-level controller [14], or (iii) train a fast-slow dual system end-to-end with a learned latent interface [15, 16, 17, 18], which requires substantial training data and tightly couples the two stacks. The open question is how to use a stale selection to drive a fast loop without blocking it, retraining it, or executing dangerously outdated trajectories. Our approach takes a different path: don’t stop, but do fusion. Three design choices together en-able latency-resilient, training-free VLM augmentation: (1) Planner provides dynamics; VLM provides semantics. We constrain the VLM to picking an index k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } over planner-generated candidates. The planner has already verified collision-freedom and kinematic feasibility, so any VLM choice is safe by construction. (2) Training-free, out-of-the-box VLMs. We render candidates onto the camera image and prompt off-the-shelf VLMs (Gemini, GPT-5, Qwen) zero-shot, removing the need for VLA training data and letting the system absorb foundation-model improvements as they ship. (3) Continuous control via Score Fusion. Stale VLM advice biases the planner’s per-tick scoring rather than driving the robot directly: candidates geometrically simi-lar to the stale selection receive a bonus that decays exponentially with age. Combined with VLM Streaming (pipelined, fixed-cadence queries), the robot is never blocked waiting for a response. In summary, we make the following contributions: 1. We formulate VLM-augmented navigation as selection over planner candidates, enabling training-free deployment of off-the-shelf VLMs. On challenging scenarios, VLM selection achieves 30% ADE reduction versus planner argmax; on routine scenarios, the planner remains competitive, justifying our fusion approach. 2. We propose Score Fusion and Probability Fusion to handle 1–2 s VLM latency, enabling continuous robot motion without blocking. In simulation, fusion maintains >80% success with delays up to 5 s; in the field, the robot operates smoothly with 1.5–3 s network latency. 3. We demonstrate the full system on a mobile robot navigating campus sidewalks, show-ing that VLM augmentation reduces human interventions while preserving the planner’s reactive capabilities. 22 Related Work 

Learned Local Planners. Modern planners generate diverse, dynamically feasible trajectories but struggle with semantic scoring. GNM [19], ViNT [2], and NoMaD [1] establish diffusion-based navigation with multi-hypothesis outputs. S2E [3] introduces anchor-based candidates, exactly the set our method consumes. A key insight from MTR [6] supports our approach: their ablation shows trajectory refinement provides marginal gains, while correct scoring drives performance. Rather than improving generation, we improve scoring via VLM selection. 

VLM-Augmented Trajectory Scoring and End-to-End VLAs. Two lines of work inject VLMs into the control loop. The first keeps a learned planner and uses a VLM to score or select among its candidates: visual-prompt selectors that overlay numbered candidates on the image [12, 13], scor-ing functions trained without imitation or from privileged information [4, 7, 20], and VLM-derived preference, social-cost, or latent-verification signals [5, 21, 22, 23]. Our selection mechanism fol-lows the visual-prompt line but is training-free. Our major contribution is the latency-resilient fusion layer that turns a stale selection into a usable signal at 5–20 Hz. The second line replaces the planner with an end-to-end VLA fine-tuned for action output [24, 8, 14], which inherits 1–5 Hz inference limits; NaVILA [14] in particular emits low-frequency spatial commands (“move forward 75 cm”) for a separate locomotion policy, suitable for legged indoor settings but conservative for continuous wheeled sidewalk motion. 

Dual-System Architectures and Latency Handling. A growing set of designs handles VLM/VLA latency via action-level asynchrony, where a slow stack emits action chunks or latent commands and a fast head stitches them together. Slow-fast architectures pair semantic reasoning at 1–2 Hz with reactive control at 20–30 Hz through learned latent plans or jointly-trained fast experts [18, 25, 26, 15, 16, 17, 27, 28]. A second cluster handles the action-chunk boundary explicitly via polynomial seam smoothing or forward-rolled-state queries [29, 30], while StreamVLN [31] attacks VLM-internal latency through slow-fast context modeling and KV-cache reuse. FOREWARN [23] is closest in spirit, using a learned latent world model to let the VLM verify rollouts. All of these require either training a shared interface or committing to the seam of an old action chunk. Our fusion operates at the trajectory level: every control tick the planner regenerates a candidate set on fresh observations, and fusion picks the current candidate whose geometry best matches the stale VLM choice with exponential staleness decay. The mechanism is heuristic and training-free, requiring no joint optimization with planner or VLM. Tab. 1 positions our approach against these prior works: among methods that retain a learned planner, ours is the only one that is simultaneously training-free, continuous-control, and latency-resilient via trajectory-level fusion (rather than action-level chunk stitching). 

3 Method 

We propose a hybrid architecture that combines a fast local planner and a slow Vision-Language Model (VLM). The planner generates dynamically feasible candidate trajectories at high frequency and the VLM provides semantic judgment asynchronously with 1–2 s latency. The key challenge is bridging this temporal mismatch: how can stale VLM advice improve real-time trajectory selection? 

3.1 System Overview 

Our system operates as two loosely-coupled loops (Fig. 1): 

Fast Loop (Planner). At each control tick (5–20 Hz), the planner generates K candidate trajectories 

{τ1, . . . , τ K }, each a sequence of (x, y ) waypoints in the robot frame. The planner is trained to emit candidates that are kinematically realizable and locally obstacle-avoiding, and assigns each candidate a confidence score from its internal objective. We denote the planner scores as S1(τi).This means the planner already absorbs robot dynamics and short-horizon avoidance; the VLM’s role downstream is to break ties on semantically ambiguous picks among an already-feasible set. 3Table 1: Comparison with related VLM-augmented robot control approaches. Method Training Free Continuous Control Latency Handling Fusion Level Planner Fallback E2E VLAs [9, 32] ✗ ✗ ✗ – ✗                                                      

> NaVILA [14] ✗✗Low-freq cmd Action ✓
> PIVOT [12] ✓✗✗Traj. ✗
> VL-TGS [13] ✓✗✗Traj. ✗
> VLM-Social-Nav [22] ✓✗✗Score ✗
> FOREWARN [23] ✗––Latent traj. ✓
> VLA-RAIL [29] ✗✓Chunk stitch Action ✗
> VLASH [30] ✗✓Future-state Action ✗
> DuoCore-FS [17] ✗✓Async latent Action ✗
> π0.5, GR00T [27, 28] ✗✓Async Action ✗
> Ours ✓✓Score Fusion Traj. ✓ADE (m)
> 0
> 0.175
> 0.35
> 0.525
> 0.7
> Oracle Planner VLM 0.60 0.502 0.29
> (A) Normal Scenarios
> ADE (m)
> 0
> 0.45
> 0.9
> 1.35
> 1.8
> Oracle Planner VLM 1.16 1.64 0.39
> (B) Hard Scenarios

Figure 2: VLM selection performance. The planner is better on normal and the VLM outperforms on hard. 

Slow Loop (VLM). A VLM asynchronously receives a visual query: the current camera image with K candidate trajectories overlaid as colored polylines. The VLM outputs a selected index 

k⋆ ∈ { 1, . . . , K }, representing its judgment of which trajectory best satisfies the navigation goal and social norms. This call takes ∆t ≈ 1–2 s; by the time the response arrives, the robot has moved and the planner has generated new candidates. 

Fusion. Rather than directly executing the (now stale) VLM-selected trajectory, we use its semantic intent to bias the current planner candidates. The VLM’s choice encodes high-level preferences (“stay on sidewalk,” “yield to pedestrian”) that remain valid even as the specific trajectory becomes outdated. We propose latency-resilient fusion mechanisms that combine geometric similarity with exponential staleness decay. 

3.2 Visual Trajectory Selection 

We render candidate trajectories onto the current camera image as numbered, colored annotations and let an off-the-shelf VLM pick an index. 

Visual Overlay. We project each candidate trajectory τi onto the camera image using the known camera extrinsics and intrinsics. Each trajectory is rendered as a colored polyline with its index labeled at the endpoint. The goal direction is optionally marked with an arrow. This visual repre-sentation lets the VLM reason directly in pixel space: it can see where each trajectory leads relative to sidewalk boundaries, pedestrians, and obstacles. 

Structured Output. The VLM outputs a JSON response specifying its selected index and reasoning (see Fig. 5). The VLM can also select action “stop” as a safety guardrail. If the VLM cannot parse a valid selection or times out, the system falls back to the planner’s argmax: k = arg max i S1(τi).

Training-Free Deployment. Critically, we use off-the-shelf VLMs (Gemini, GPT-5, Qwen) with-out any fine-tuning. The visual prompting interface transforms trajectory selection into a visual reasoning task that general-purpose VLMs can solve zero-shot. This eliminates the need for VLA training data, domain adaptation, or specialized model architectures. 

3.3 Latency-Resilient Fusion 

The central question is how to use a delayed VLM selection as a usable signal for real-time control: rather than discarding it or executing the outdated trajectory itself, we fuse its semantic intent into the planner’s per-tick scoring over freshly generated candidates. Below we describe the shared foundation (geometric similarity, staleness decay) and two fusion variants. 

Geometric Similarity. Let τvlm denote the trajectory the VLM selected (in the robot frame at query time). We motion-compensate it into the current robot frame using odometry, then compute a 4t=0                            

> t=2s
> Project robot origin onto
> in arc length s=s0
> remaining arc
> length: L−s0
> s=0
> s=L
> remaining fraction:
> L−s0
> L
> #pre fi xpoints
> Nuse=N⋅L−s0
> L
> resample to
> points N⋅L−s0
> L
> (A) Build arc length coordinate (B) Select prefix points
> …
> (C) Resample remaining arc then
> compute pointwise distance

Figure 3: Horizon-aware similarity for delayed VLM guidance. The stale VLM trajectory is motion-compensated into the current frame; arclength progress s0 defines the remaining horizon over which similarity is computed (Sec. 3.3). horizon-aware similarity (Fig. 3): Sim (τi, τ vlm ) = − 1

dscale 

· 1

Nuse 

> Nuse

X

> n=1

∥τi[n] − ˆτvlm [n]∥2 , (1) where ˆτvlm is the remaining segment of the delayed VLM trajectory after progress alignment. Specif-ically, we project the robot origin onto the motion-compensated polyline to obtain arclength progress 

s0 and remaining fraction f = ( L − s0)/L , set Nuse = round( N · f ), and compare only the over-lapping horizon. Higher similarity means the candidate follows the VLM’s intent without forcing a match on the future tail. 

Staleness Decay. As VLM advice ages, its relevance decreases. We apply exponential decay: 

w(∆ t) = exp 



− ∆tτdecay 



where τdecay is a time constant (typically 3–5 s). Fresh advice receives full weight; advice older than ∼ 2τdecay is effectively ignored. 

Score Fusion. The simplest approach adds a weighted similarity term to the planner’s scores: 

Sfused (τi) = S1(τi) + λ · w(∆ t) · Sim (τi, τ vlm ), (2) where λ controls VLM influence strength. The robot executes k = arg max i Sfused (τi). This formu-lation gracefully degrades: without VLM advice, it reduces to planner argmax; stale advice decays naturally. 

Probability Fusion. Score Fusion’s unbounded similarity term can dominate when λ is large. Prob-ability Fusion provides a more controlled alternative by mixing distributions: 

pfused (τi) = (1 − α) · pplanner (τi) + α · pvlm (τi), (3) where pplanner and pvlm are softmax distributions over planner scores and VLM similarities respec-tively, and α = λλ+1 · w(∆ t) is a staleness-dependent mixing coefficient. Even with λ → ∞ , the coefficient α ≤ 1, bounding the influence of VLM on planner. 

VLM Streaming. We submit queries at a fixed cadence (1 Hz by default) without waiting for previ-ous responses, keep multiple requests in flight, and on each tick fuse with the newest-by-timestamp response that has arrived (out-of-order arrivals are common over cellular). The robot is never blocked: the fusion mechanism always has some semantic guidance available. This differs from prior dual-system designs [14, 15, 16] that handle latency by decimating the slow loop and commit-ting to a specific low-level policy or action vocabulary. Our streaming-plus-fusion path keeps the slow loop at its native rate and uses the planner’s regenerated candidates as the live interface, so the VLM and the planner remain independently swappable. 

4 Experiments 

The evaluation has three components: (1) offline trajectory selection on real-world navigation logs; (2) closed-loop simulation under VLM latency with a controlled corrupted planner, isolating the 5                        

> -&!*("' $,!+
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> &  ()'(#(%
> (). #(%
> !',!*. #(%
> ' (&()
> %''!**#&/
> ,- !#+0#. -,/0 -,/0
> -., $')0#.
> &'+,$
> )++'+%
> .'"
>  
> "'/(
>  
> *#+/
>  
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> *
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> (A) VLM Candidate Generation Strategies (B) Candidate Set Size
>   
> 
> 
> 
> 
>  
> 
> 
>  
> 
> (C) Frame History

Figure 4: Ablations on VLM trajectory selection (1,412 hard scenarios). (A) Candidate gen-eration: score-based Top-K vs. geometric diversification. (B) Candidate set size K. (C) Prompt content: goal, scores, and history frames. Table 2: VLM trajectory selection quality and cost across model families. All models use Top-K=18 candidates. Latency is median end-to-end inference time in seconds. 

Trajectory Quality Goal Alignment Cost / Latency 

Model ADE ↓ ADE@1s ↓ ADE@2s ↓ AngDiff ↓ Progress ↑ MAOE ↓ In Tok Out Tok Total Tok Latency (s) ↓

Planner Argmax 1.64 0.64 1.06 16.08 4.88 16.38 – – – –Gemini 3 Flash 1.16 0.39 0.66 16.76 6.16 15.70 2744 62 5957 8.1 Gemini 2.5 Flash 1.20 0.41 0.69 17.04 6.32 16.14 1902 82 4134 13.2 Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite 1.21 0.40 0.68 17.43 6.20 16.50 1902 85 1994 1.7 

Gemini Robotics ER 1.5 1.21 0.41 0.69 16.78 6.06 15.86 1902 73 3372 14.4 GPT-5 Mini 1.47 0.48 0.82 17.53 5.05 18.00 2181 – 3196 16.6 GPT-5 Nano 1.77 0.54 0.98 17.53 4.43 17.33 2334 – 5053 22.0 Qwen2.5-VL-72B 1.20 0.40 0.68 17.11 6.01 16.18 2250 43 2293 11.8 Qwen2.5-VL-32B 1.81 0.55 0.99 17.20 4.12 17.41 2250 52 2302 13.1 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 2.27 0.69 1.25 16.46 3.33 19.45 2250 48 2298 2.7 effect of latency and fusion policy; (3) a real-world deployment on campus sidewalks under realistic cellular latency. 

4.1 Offline Trajectory Selection 

We test whether an off-the-shelf VLM-as-selector helps on our real-world sidewalk dataset, which sets an upper bound on what fusion can preserve under latency. 

Dataset. We use two pools of logs from wheeled robots on urban sidewalks. The normal pool (∼3,000 snapshots) is sampled routes on relatively unchallenging streets, where the planner’s argmax is typically already a sensible action. The hard pool ( ∼2,000 snapshots) is collected on a university campus and curated to over-represent semantically challenging situations: junctions, pedestrian and cyclist encounters, terrain boundaries (grass, planters, curbs), obstacles, and am-biguous forks. Each snapshot ships an RGB frame, the 64 anchor-based candidate trajectories with planner scores, and the human teleoperator’s executed path as ground truth. 

Local Planner. We use S2E [3], an anchor-based model that emits 64 multi-hypothesis (x, y ) tra-jectories per frame with planner scores. Full details are in the appendix. 

Baselines and Metric. We compare Planner Argmax (the planner’s own top-1) and Oracle (the min-ADE candidate among the planner’s 64 raw candidates, an upper bound for any selector that consumes this candidate set). We report Average Displacement Error (ADE), the mean Euclidean distance between the selected trajectory’s waypoints and the human teleoperator’s path over the candidate horizon, as our primary metric. 

Main Results: VLM Excels in Hard Scenarios. Fig. 2 reports ADE on both splits. On the hard split (Fig. 2B), the VLM selector (Gemini 3 Flash) achieves 1.16 m ADE, reducing error by 30% compared to the planner argmax (1.64 m) and approaching the oracle lower bound (0.39 m); the planner’s scoring function struggles with semantic ambiguity, while the VLM’s visual reasoning handles these situations well. On the normal split (Fig. 2A), the VLM actually underperforms the 61                                         

> (A) Success Mode
> VLM selects 14
> Planner selects: 25
> FDE improvement: 3.2m
> {
> "action": "select_trajectory",
> "critical_object": [],
> "reason": "Trajectory 14 is well-
> aligned with the goal direction and
> stays safely on the paved sidewalk.",
> "selected_index": 14
> }
> {
> "action": "select_trajectory",
> "critical_object": [],
> "reason": "Trajectory 14 follows
> the sidewalk curve toward the goal,
> maintaining asafe distance from the
> wall and making the best progress in
> the correct direction.",
> "selected_index": 14
> }
> (B) Failure Mode
> VLM selects 14
> Planner selects: 7
> FDE improvement: -4.5m

Figure 5: (A) At a junction, the VLM picks tra-jectory 14 along the sidewalk curve. (B) On a routine straight, the VLM applies near-identical reasoning but again picks 14, while the planner’s argmax 7 was better.                  

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
>        
>  *&
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> (&&%'
> (&&%')& * !'#&
> $ ""%#% 
> # " *
> # %'
> '%!%'
> #%(&#"&'%!
> %#(&#"&'%!
> Oracle Planner
> Corrupted Planner
> VLM Hold
> VLM Stream
> Score Fusion
> Prob Fusion

Figure 6: Closed-loop success rate vs. VLM delay . Score Fusion holds above 80% out to 5 s and Probability Fusion stays within a few points of it ( ∼78% at 5 s), while VLM Hold collapses past 2 s and VLM Stream past 3 s. planner: in routine situations the planner’s learned scoring is already well-calibrated, and VLM selection introduces unnecessary variance. The oracle confirms that better candidates exist on this split too, but the planner already selects near-optimally. This finding is consistent with observations in autonomous driving, where VLM-based systems excel at handling edge cases but may overthink routine situations [33, 5]. The pattern also shows up qualitatively, as shown in Fig. 5: in the success case (A), the VLM correctly identifies the sidewalk curve at a junction, improving FDE by 3.2 m; in the failure case (B), the VLM applies similar reasoning to a routine straight segment but selects a suboptimal trajectory, degrading FDE by 4.5 m. This motivates our fusion approach: rather than always trusting the VLM, we blend its advice with the planner’s judgment so that the VLM’s semantic understanding dominates in hard scenarios while the planner’s confidence remains the anchor in normal ones. 

Score-Based Filtering Outperforms Geometric Diversification. As shown in Fig. 4(A), we com-pared six strategies for selecting K candidates from the original 64. • Top-K (our default) keeps the 

K highest-scored candidates; • K-center runs greedy farthest-point sampling on trajectory endpoints to maximize geometric diversity; • K-means clusters endpoints and returns medoids; • Post-NMS 

suppresses near-duplicate candidates by trajectory similarity; • Grid ignores the planner entirely and uses static prototype trajectories defined by an angle/distance grid with linear interpolation; and 

• Chain-of-Planning applies a two-stage hierarchical selection on top of the others. Score-based Top-K filtering is the best of these; K-center and K-means achieve similar performance, while static grid prototypes perform poorly. The takeaway is that planner confidence provides valuable sig-nal for candidate pruning: the top-scored candidates are more likely to contain good options than geometrically diverse samples are. 

Scaling the candidate set size K. As shown in Fig. 4(B), VLM selection improves as K grows from 6 to 18 and then plateaus. Beyond K ≈ 24 additional candidates make the visual prompt more complex without adding value. 

Prompt Design. All prompt-design ablations use the hard subset (1,412 snapshots) where selec-tion is most challenging, as shown in Fig. 4(C). First, adding history frames (1–2 previous camera images) degrades performance slightly, as the planner candidates already encode short-horizon fea-sibility and the VLM’s role is semantic understanding, which is fully captured in the current frame. Second, hiding goal information and planner scores improves selection: when scores are visible, the VLM tends to defer to the planner’s ranking rather than apply its own judgment. Our best configu-ration hides both, letting the VLM reason from visual evidence alone. 

Model Comparison. Tab. 2 compares VLM trajectory selection across model families on the hard scenarios. Gemini 3 Flash achieves the best overall ADE, closely followed by Gemini 2.5 Flash 71   

> A pedestrian is directly in front
> of the robot. Trajectories 9, 49,
> and 42 move towards the
> pedestrian. Trajectory 18 also
> moves towards the pedestrian.
> Trajectory 30 moves away from
> the pedestrian and is safe.
> (A) Robot Platform (B) Real-world VLM Input (C) VLM Reasoning Trace

Figure 7: Real-world deployment. (A) Robot platform. We use a four-wheeled delivery robot on a campus sidewalk shared with pedestrians. (B) Real-world VLM input. The actual overlay the VLM sees: the front-camera frame with the trajectory overlay and a pedestrian is directly ahead. 

(C) VLM reasoning trace. The natural-language reason field by VLM. variants and Qwen2.5-VL-72B. GPT-5 models show weaker performance, and smaller Qwen models degrade further. For real-time deployment, Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite offers the best latency–quality tradeoff: 1.7 s median latency with competitive ADE. 

4.2 Closed-Loop Simulation Under VLM Latency 

We study whether VLMs are still helpful under 1–3 s of latency in closed loop, and whether fusion preserves the headroom that direct execution of stale VLM trajectories does not. 

Setup. We develop a lightweight simulator that uses human-teleoperation trajectories as the refer-ence and a fixed set of K=12 trajectories as the “planner’s” candidate set. The “VLM” is a delayed oracle : at query time it picks the min-ADE candidate and returns ∆t ∈ { 0, 0.5, . . . , 5.0} s later, simulating the latency. The planner’s score is corrupted so Local-only does not trivially pick the best candidate. We compare Planner Oracle (uncorrupted argmax), Local-only (corrupted argmax), 

VLM Hold/Stream , VLM Match , and Score/Probability Fusion (Eq. 2, 3); full details in App. B. The metric is success rate—the fraction of episodes reaching the reference endpoint. 

Main result. Fig. 6 plots success rate as a function of ∆t. Score Fusion holds above 80% out to 5 s of VLM latency and Probability Fusion remains close to that level (around 78% at 5 s), while VLM Hold collapses past 2 s and is near zero by 4 s; streaming buys VLM Stream a few additional seconds but it still falls below 20% success at 5 s. Fusion outperforms both stale-execution policies because the planner regenerates candidates each tick on fresh observations and the geometric similarity term picks the current candidate whose geometry best matches the stale VLM’s semantic intent, instead of committing to a polyline the world has already moved past. 

Probability Fusion is more stable. With streaming, Score Fusion can become unstable at large λ

because its similarity term is unbounded; Probability Fusion bounds VLM influence via α ≤ 1 and is markedly less sensitive to hyperparameter choice. We therefore recommend Probability Fusion with streaming for deployment, which is what our real-robot setup uses in Sec. 4.3. 

4.3 Real-World Deployment 

We validate the full system on a four-wheeled delivery robot navigating urban sidewalks (Fig. 7). Closed-loop trajectories, VLM responses, and the takeover events that drive the safety metrics in Tab. 3 are shown in the supplementary video. 

Robot and Control. We use a four-wheeled robot equipped with an RGB camera and wheel odom-etry. At each control tick, the local planner outputs a short-horizon waypoint polyline, and a pure pursuit controller converts waypoints into linear and angular velocity commands (v, ω ). Odometry provides real-time state estimation for closed-loop tracking and goal reference updates. All policies run at 5 Hz. The local planner executes on a laptop with an NVIDIA RTX 3080 mobile GPU. VLM queries are sent over a 4G cellular connection to a cloud API (Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite), with observed round-trip latency typically 1.5–3.0 s depending on network conditions. 

Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate on 5 real-world routes covering diverse urban sidewalk envi-ronments. Each policy is tested across multiple runs. A human operator monitors the robot and 8Table 3: Real-robot closed-loop metrics. All deviation metrics report 90th percentile values.                                                            

> Safety Trajectory Consistency VLM–Planner Alignment
> Method Takeovers per 100m ↓
> Takeovers per min ↓
> Longest Seg (m) ↑
> TempCons (m) ↓
> Exec–Argmax Dev (m) ↓
> Match–Argmax Dev (m) VLM–Argmax Dev (m) Agreement (%) Local-only 3.49 0.99 88.4 0.57 0.00 –––VLM Hold 8.15 1.19 27.0 0.07 3.99 –2.90 10.7 VLM Stream 4.40 1.15 71.9 0.48 3.36 –3.35 9.2 VLM Match (Hold) 1.74 0.46 88.8 0.47 3.42 4.02 3.94 5.6 VLM Match (Stream) 2.18 0.59 87.1 0.47 3.16 3.64 3.53 8.5 Score Fusion (Stream) 1.31 0.37 95.2 0.36 1.77 3.51 3.61 7.1
> Prob Fusion (Stream) 0.87 0.24 111.7 0.45 1.56 3.86 3.40 9.1

intervenes when the robot is about to drive off the sidewalk, contact an obstacle, or otherwise enter an unsafe state. We report metrics in three categories in Tab. 3: 1) Safety metrics measure human in-tervention frequency. “Takeovers per 100 m” and “per minute” normalize interventions by distance and time respectively. “Longest autonomous segment” measures the maximum distance traveled without intervention. 2) Trajectory consistency metrics measure execution stability. “Temporal consistency” (TempCons) is the motion-compensated ADE between consecutive waypoint outputs; lower values indicate smoother trajectories. “Exec–Argmax deviation” measures how far the ex-ecuted trajectory deviates from the planner’s current argmax, indicating the VLM’s influence on execution. 3) VLM agreement metrics characterize VLM–planner alignment. “VLM–Argmax devi-ation” measures the geometric deviation between VLM-selected and planner-selected trajectories at query time. “Agreement rate” is the percentage where VLM and planner select the same trajectory index. 

Results. 1) Naive VLM execution is dangerous. VLM Hold produces the highest intervention rate (8.15 takeovers per 100 m) and the shortest autonomous segment (27.0 m). The robot executes trajectories selected seconds ago, leading to collisions or off-road excursions. 2) Fusion enables safe continuous control. Probability Fusion with Streaming reduces interventions to 0.87 per 100 m, a 75% reduction from Local-only (3.49) and 89% from VLM Hold (8.15). It also achieves the longest autonomous segment (111.7 m) and bounded deviation from the planner’s argmax (1.56 m). 3) Streaming alone is insufficient. VLM Stream (without fusion) still suffers elevated interventions (4.40/100 m) because it directly executes stale trajectories. Fusion is necessary to translate VLM advice into safe real-time control. Human observers noted that the robot’s behavior appeared “intentional” rather than “confused,” a qualitative improvement over the planner-only baseline. Full closed-loop traces of real-world experiments are shown in the supplementary video. 

5 Conclusion 

We have presented a latency-resilient approach to VLM-augmented navigation that enables contin-uous robot control despite 1–2 s VLM inference delays. Our key insight is that a fast planner and a slow VLM provide complementary capabilities that can be fused rather than forced into a sin-gle system. Off-the-shelf VLMs excel at trajectory selection in semantically challenging scenarios (30% ADE reduction), while learned planners remain competitive in routine situations—motivating a fusion approach rather than VLM-only control. Score and Probability Fusion enable continuous control under latency. Real-world deployment with Probability Fusion and VLM Streaming sub-stantially reduces human interventions compared to both planner-only and naive VLM execution. 

Limitations and Future Work Our approach inherits the planner’s candidate set; if no good can-didate exists, the VLM cannot help. We find VLM selection does not universally outperform the planner: in routine scenarios, the planner’s learned scoring often suffices, and VLM queries con-sume computational resources without benefit. Our closed-loop simulator also models the VLM as a delayed oracle, which cannot exhibit real-world scene drift. Next steps include adaptive querying that invokes the VLM only when the planner is uncertain, studying the interaction between VLM and planner beyond trajectory selection, and testing the whole system in more realistic simulator. 9References 

[1] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine. Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 63–70. IEEE, 2024. [2] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, N. Dashora, K. Stachowicz, K. Black, N. Hirose, and S. Levine. Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14846 , 2023. [3] H. He, Y. Ma, W. Wu, and B. Zhou. From seeing to experiencing: Scaling navigation founda-tion models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22028 , 2025. [4] Z. Li, W. Yao, Z. Wang, X. Sun, J. Chen, N. Chang, M. Shen, J. Song, Z. Wu, S. Lan, and J. M. Alvarez. Ztrs: Zero-imitation end-to-end autonomous driving with trajectory scoring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24108 , 2025. [5] J. Song, Z. Li, S. Lan, X. Sun, N. Chang, M. Shen, J. Chen, K. A. Skinner, and J. M. Alvarez. Drivecritic: Towards context-aware, human-aligned evaluation for autonomous driving with vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13108 , 2025. [6] S. Shi, L. Jiang, D. Dai, and B. Schiele. Motion transformer with global intention localiza-tion and local movement refinement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [7] E. Kirby, A. Boulch, Y. Xu, Y. Yin, G. Puy, ´ E. Zablocki, A. Bursuc, S. Gidaris, R. Marlet, F. Bartoccioni, A.-Q. Cao, N. Samet, T.-H. Vu, and M. Cord. Driving on registers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05083 , 2026. [8] A. Li, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Qi, Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, and H. Wang. Urbanvla: A vision-language-action model for urban micromobility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23576 , 2025. [9] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia, J. Wu, P. Wohlhart, S. Welker, A. Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. [10] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. [11] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Haus-man, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2023. [12] S. Nasiriany, F. Xia, W. Yu, T. Xiao, J. Liang, I. Dasgupta, A. Xie, D. Driess, A. Wahid, Z. Xu, et al. Pivot: Iterative visual prompting elicits actionable knowledge for vlms. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 37321–37341. PMLR, 2024. [13] D. Song, J. Liang, X. Xiao, and D. Manocha. Vl-tgs: Trajectory generation and selection using vision language models in mapless outdoor environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(6), 2025. [14] A.-C. Cheng, Y. Ji, Z. Yang, Z. Gongye, X. Zou, J. Kautz, E. Bıyık, H. Yin, S. Liu, and X. Wang. Navila: Legged robot vision-language-action model for navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04453 , 2024. [15] M. Wei, C. Wan, J. Peng, X. Yu, Y. Yang, D. Feng, W. Cai, C. Zhu, T. Wang, J. Pang, and X. Liu. Ground slow, move fast: A dual-system foundation model for generalizable vision-and-language navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.08186 , 2025. 10 [16] InternVLA-N1 Team. Internvla-n1: An open dual-system vision-language navigation foun-dation model with learned latent plans. Technical Report, Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2025. 

https://internrobotics.github.io/internvla-n1.github.io/ .[17] T. Zou, H. Zeng, Y. Nong, Y. Li, K. Liu, H. Yang, X. Ling, X. Li, and L. Ma. Asynchronous fast-slow vision-language-action policies for whole-body robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20188 , 2025. [18] H. Chen, J. Liu, C. Gu, Z. Liu, R. Zhang, X. Li, X. He, Y. Guo, C.-W. Fu, S. Zhang, et al. Fast-in-slow: A dual-system foundation model unifying fast manipulation within slow reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01953 , 2025. [19] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, A. Bhorkar, N. Hirose, and S. Levine. Gnm: A general navigation model to drive any robot. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2023. [20] W. Cai, J. Peng, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Wang, and J. Pang. Navdp: Learning sim-to-real navigation diffusion policy with privileged information guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08712 , 2025. [21] M. Hwang, J. Hejna, D. Sadigh, and Y. Bisk. Motif: Motion instruction fine-tuning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. arXiv:2409.10683. [22] D. Song, J. Liang, A. Payandeh, A. H. Raj, X. Xiao, and D. Manocha. Vlm-social-nav: Socially aware robot navigation through scoring using vision-language models. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [23] Y. Wu, R. Tian, G. Swamy, and A. Bajcsy. From foresight to forethought: Vlm-in-the-loop policy steering via latent alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01828 , 2025. [24] X. Liu, J. Li, Y. Jiang, N. Sujay, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Abanes, J. Zhang, and C. Feng. City-walker: Learning embodied urban navigation from web-scale videos. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 6875–6885, 2025. [25] B. Han, J. Kim, and J. Jang. A dual process vla: Efficient robotic manipulation leveraging vlm. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15549 , 2024. [26] Figure AI. Helix: A vision-language-action model for generalist humanoid control. https: //www.figure.ai/news/helix , 2025. [27] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, et al. π0.5: A vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [28] NVIDIA GEAR Team. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. [29] Y. Zhao, L. Zhao, B. Cheng, G. Yao, X. Wen, and H. Gao. Vla-rail: A real-time asynchronous inference linker for vla models and robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24673 , 2025. [30] J. Tang, Y. Sun, Y. Zhao, S. Yang, Y. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Hou, Y. Lu, Z. Liu, and S. Han. Vlash: Real-time vlas via future-state-aware asynchronous inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01031 , 2025. [31] M. Wei, C. Wan, X. Yu, T. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Mao, C. Zhu, W. Cai, H. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Liu, and J. Pang. Streamvln: Streaming vision-and-language navigation via slowfast context modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05240 , 2025. 11 [32] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [33] X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, K. Zhan, P. Jia, X. Lang, and H. Zhao. Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12289 , 2024. 12 A VLM Interface for Trajectory Selection 

A.1 Interface Overview 

Our VLM does trajectory selection rather than low-level control: at each step, a fast local planner proposes a discrete set of short-horizon candidate trajectories (4 s horizon), and the VLM returns either (i) the index of one candidate to execute next or (ii) a stop decision when none appear safe. This constrains VLM outputs to dynamically feasible motions and enables safety fallbacks. 

A.2 Local Planner: Anchor-Based Candidate Generation 

We adopt S2E [3] as our local planner. Unlike diffusion-based navigation models (e.g., NoMaD [1]), S2E uses anchor-guided distribution matching to produce a structured set of candidate trajectories. 

Anchor set. The model defines M = 64 anchor points obtained via k-means clustering over trajec-tory endpoints in the training data. Each anchor represents a prototypical behavioral mode (e.g., go straight, veer left, slow down, sharp turn). These anchors are fixed after training and serve as queries in a cross-attention decoder. 

Architecture and outputs. Given the current RGB observation (past k = 5 frames) and a goal coordinate, an EfficientNet encoder and a Transformer encoder produce scene context embeddings. A Transformer decoder then cross-attends from the M anchor queries to these context embeddings, producing per-anchor features. Three lightweight heads decode each anchor feature into: 1. a score qm ∈ [0 , 1] (softmax-normalized), representing the model’s confidence that anchor m is the best behavioral mode for the current situation; 2. a regression trajectory τm: a sequence of (x, y ) waypoints (normalized offsets from the anchor), forming a 4 s, 20-waypoint polyline in the robot frame; 3. a velocity scale vm, converting the normalized trajectory into metric coordinates. The result is 64 candidate trajectories, each with an associated planner score. In our pipeline, we select the top-K candidates by score (default K=18 ) for presentation to the VLM (see ablation in the main paper, Fig. 4(B)). 

Why anchor-based design matters for our method. The anchor-based architecture is particularly well-suited to our VLM-augmented pipeline for two reasons. First, the scores provide a natural baseline ranking that our fusion mechanism can augment: Score Fusion (Eq. 2) adds a VLM simi-larity bonus to these planner scores, so the planner’s learned confidence is preserved and the VLM only overrides it when semantic judgment disagrees. Second, because the anchors are fixed across time steps, consecutive frames produce geometrically consistent candidate sets, which makes the horizon-aware similarity computation for stale VLM advice (Sec. 3.3) more stable than it would be with a diffusion-based planner whose candidates vary stochastically from frame to frame. 

A.3 Candidate Visualization (Overlay Design) What is rendered. We render an overlay on the front camera image with: • candidate trajectories as colored polylines (or optionally as swept-footprint corridors); • a small dot at each candidate endpoint; • an integer index label near each endpoint (the label text is the authoritative ID); • an optional goal cue (magenta GOAL marker and/or a “hanging” arrow). 

Projection and geometry. Candidates are defined in the robot body frame (xforward , y left ) on the ground plane and projected into the camera image using a lightweight fisheye projection. The over-lay legend reminds the VLM that fisheye distortion is normal near image borders. 

Label-to-line disambiguation. To reduce index confusion when trajectories overlap, each label is drawn with a background color matching its trajectory color; if a label must be moved for readability, a thin leader line connects the label to the endpoint dot. 13 Fig. 5 illustrates the visualization. 

A.4 Prompt Design Separation of concerns. The system prompt enforces a safety-first policy and defines output format. The user prompt provides per-step state: the goal (if any), candidate count, and a table for displayed candidates including geometry (and optionally planner confidence, which we often hide to avoid anchoring). 

Short-horizon semantics. The prompt explicitly states that candidates cover only ∼4 s and that the goal can be off-screen and far beyond the horizon; therefore the correct behavior is to pick a locally safe candidate that makes progress, not to “reach the goal” in one step. 

A.5 Full System/User Prompt and Example Outputs 

We include the full prompt in Fig. 10. The actual VLM request contains both the text below and the overlay image (and optionally a short stack of history frames). The system prompt does not change across steps or scenarios, which allows us to leverage context caching offered by the model provider (e.g., Gemini’s cached-content API) to improve throughput and reduce both cost and latency. 

A.6 Output Validation and Robust Parsing 

To make execution and evaluation robust, we validate VLM outputs and normalize common format-ting deviations. The parser handles the following cases in order: 1. Code-fence stripping: JSON wrapped in Markdown code fences (e.g., triple-backtick json 

blocks) is extracted before parsing. 2. JSON object extraction: the first {... } block is parsed; action-field values 

select trajectory , select , stop , and halt are all accepted. 3. Bare integer fallback: if the response is a single integer (no JSON), it is treated as a trajectory index. 4. Index validation: if the returned index is not in the set of displayed labels, the parser attempts a rank-based mapping (interpreting the integer as a 0-based row index into the candidate table). If mapping also fails, the output is treated as invalid. If parsing fails entirely or the index is out of range after mapping, we treat the step as invalid and fall back to a safe behavior (planner argmax or stop) in deployment. 

B Closed-Loop Benchmark 

B.1 Simulator Overview 

We evaluate latency resilience in a lightweight closed-loop simulator that tracks a reference path extracted from real odometry. The simulator runs control at ∆tcontrol = 0 .1 s , replanning at ∆tplan =0.2 s (5 Hz), with a 4 s trajectory horizon (20 waypoints). At each plan tick, we transform a fixed library of K robot-frame candidate trajectories (we use a K-means medoid set; K = 12 in our default experiments) into world frame using the current pose and select one candidate according to the evaluated policy; a tracking controller (pure pursuit) executes the chosen polyline under velocity and rate limits. 

Non-visual, kinematics-only design. Because the simulator’s sole purpose is to study the effect of delay and fusion policies on closed-loop control—not to evaluate perception—it is intentionally non-visual: there is no rendering, no physics engine, and no sensor simulation. The robot state evolves under unicycle kinematics: 

˙x = v cos θ, ˙y = v sin θ, ˙θ = ω, (4) 14 subject to velocity and rate limits ( vmax = 2 .0 m /s, ωmax = 0 .5 rad /s). A pure-pursuit controller converts the selected polyline into (v, ω ) commands at each control tick. This lightweight design lets us sweep delay values, fusion parameters, and corruption levels over hundreds of episodes in minutes. 

B.2 Reference-Tracking Tasks 

Each closed-loop task is built from a window of real odometry: a reference polyline of duration 

Tref = 18 s extracted from odometry, with tasks sampled at stride Tstride = 5 s . We require each source episode to be at least 18 s long and sample up to 1 task per episode (uniformly over the stride grid) from up to 100 episodes, yielding up to 100 reference-tracking tasks in total. We primarily use an arclength completion definition (progress along the reference polyline) with an independent simulation time budget (default 40 s). This avoids coupling the evaluation to the original logging speed and focuses on path-following completion. 

B.3 Static Candidate Library 

The candidate library contains K = 12 robot-frame polylines, each resampled to 20 waypoints over a 4 s horizon. We construct the library by clustering a large pool of logged trajectories and selecting representative medoids (k-means in trajectory space; one medoid per cluster). 

B.4 “Fake Planner” (Corrupted Score Model) 

We define an oracle candidate trajectory out of the candidate set as the one minimizing mean point-wise distance to the current reference segment. The planner score is the same base objective plus controlled corruption to simulate mis-scoring: • Gaussian noise with standard deviation σ (default 1.0); • score temperature Ts (default 1.0; < 1 sharper, > 1 flatter), applied as division by Ts;• ϵ-corruption: with probability ϵ (default 0.3), the entire score vector is replaced with uniform random values, making the argmax effectively random for that tick. 

B.5 “Fake VLM” (Delayed Oracle Model) 

We model the VLM as a delayed oracle: at request time t0 it selects the oracle index for that reference segment, and the response is delivered at t0 + ∆ t with fixed delay ∆t.

B.6 Policies and Latency Handling 

We evaluate three families of policies: (i) direct execution of stale VLM trajectories ( VLM Hold and 

VLM Stream ); (ii) matching the stale VLM trajectory to the closest current candidate ( VLM Match ); and (iii) fusion policies that bias the planner selection toward the stale VLM intention while still choosing among current candidates ( Score Fusion / Probability Fusion ). 

Request scheduling and pipelining. We distinguish sequential request policies (submit the next query only after receiving the previous response; single in-flight request) from streaming request policies (submit at a fixed cadence; multiple pipelined in-flight requests). This separation isolates the effect of latency from throughput limitations. 

C Real-World Deployment Setup 

C.1 System Architecture 

The real-world system follows a two-rate architecture: a fast onboard local planner continuously proposes short-horizon, dynamically feasible candidate trajectories, while a slower VLM is queried asynchronously to provide high-level intent in the form of trajectory selection (Sec. A). Crucially, 15 control and planning never block on the VLM response. Instead, the system (i) executes the planner in a receding-horizon loop and (ii) incorporates the most recent available VLM intent using the latency-handling policies described in the main paper (direct execution, matching, or fusion). 

Asynchronous execution and time alignment. Each VLM request is tagged with a monotonically increasing request ID and a timestamp corresponding to the camera frame used for the overlay. When the response arrives, the policy aligns it to the current planning tick using (a) the request ID and (b) the current candidate set, applying either: (i) hold -style execution (execute the stale intent directly when feasible), (ii) match (map the stale intent to the closest current candidate), or (iii) 

fusion (bias the current planner selection toward the stale VLM intent while still selecting among up-to-date candidates). If no valid VLM output is available, the system falls back to a safe default (planner-only with conservative stopping). 

C.2 Robot, Sensors, and Control Rates 

We deploy on a wheeled delivery robot (differential-drive, four actuated wheels) with onboard odometry and a panoramic fisheye camera suite. The front fisheye camera serves as the primary perception input to both the overlay generation and the planner/VLM interface; GPS and odometry are used for state estimation and goal/route bookkeeping when needed. 

Perception streams. The system uses: • front camera input at 5 Hz (1920 ×1080 raw stream); • planner input resized to 512 ×288 (deterministic fisheye →pinhole conversion for planner input frames); • overlay images rendered at a fixed resolution (e.g., 960 ×540) consistent with Sec. A.3. 

Planning and control loop. Candidate generation and waypoint updates run at 5 Hz. The robot ex-ecutes velocity commands derived from waypoints using a simple kinematic controller (differential-drive), with conservative limits: 

vmax = 0 .5 m /s, ωmax = 0 .5 rad /s.

Odometry is consumed at its native robot rate to update the robot pose and to continuously update the tracking target during navigation. 

Pure pursuit tracking controller. The selected waypoint polyline is tracked by a pure pursuit controller. The look-ahead distance is velocity-adaptive: Ld = max( L0, L 0 + kv · v), with base look-ahead L0 = 1 .0 m and gain kv = 0 .5. The curvature command is derived from the look-ahead point and converted to angular velocity ω for the differential-drive base. The controller enforces hard limits on linear acceleration ( amax = 1 .0 m /s2), angular acceleration ( ˙ωmax = 1 .2 rad /s2), and lateral acceleration ( alat,max = 0 .8 m /s2) to ensure smooth, safe motion. 

C.3 VLM Query, Staleness Handling, and Safety Mechanisms Query scheduling. The VLM is queried asynchronously using the overlay image plus the text prompt (Sec. A.4). We support two scheduling modes: • Sequential (used by vlm hold and vlm hold match ): a single request is in flight at any time; the next request is submitted only after the previous response is received and processed. This maximizes freshness per response but limits throughput. • Streaming (used by vlm stream , score fusion stream , prob fusion stream ): requests are submitted at a fixed cadence (default 1 Hz) regardless of whether previous responses have arrived, allowing multiple in-flight requests. When responses return (potentially out of order due to vari-able network latency), the system adopts the newest advice by query timestamp. 

Output validation. All VLM outputs are parsed and validated as in Sec. A.6. Invalid outputs (non-integer index, out-of-range index, or unparsable formatting) are discarded and treated as missing. 16 Hard staleness timeout and fail-safe. To prevent executing arbitrarily stale intent, we enforce a hard timeout: if the most recent valid VLM response is older than a fixed threshold ( 5 s ) relative to the current control time, the system switches to a conservative behavior: (i) stop (preferred in crowded/uncertain scenes, used in “VLM Hold” and “VLM Stream” modes) or (ii) planner-only execution with conservative stopping enabled. Fig. 8 shows the observed VLM request–response latency over a representative real-world deployment run; the majority of responses arrive within the 

5 s timeout window, validating our choice of threshold. 

Human-in-the-loop safety. All real-world runs include a trained safety operator with an immediate override capability (teleoperation or emergency stop). Any intervention immediately cancels the current VLM intent and returns control to a safe mode; the resulting takeover event is logged and used to compute the safety metrics reported in the main paper. Speed limits are always enforced, and the robot is operated only in pedestrian environments where a safe stop is feasible at all times. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> Time since episode start (s)
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> VLM request delay (s)

Figure 8: VLM request–response latency during real-world deployment (Probability Fusion + Streaming, Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite over 4G cellular). Each dot is one VLM response; the y-axis shows the wall-clock delay between request submission and response receipt. The median latency is ≈2.7 s (min 1.7 s, max 4.5 s). The variation is driven by network jitter rather than model inference time. All responses arrive well within the 5 s hard staleness timeout, confirming that VLM Streaming with fusion provides continuous guidance under realistic network conditions. 

C.4 Evaluation Protocol and Metrics Environments and routes. Evaluation is conducted on outdoor pedestrian routes (e.g., sidewalks and campus pathways) containing natural obstacles such as pedestrians, curb cuts, surface bound-aries (grass/planters), and intersections/forks. Each route is executed multiple times per method under similar conditions; all sensor streams, planner candidates, chosen indices, and operator inter-ventions are logged with timestamps. 

Runs and completion. A run begins at a fixed start pose and continues until the robot reaches the route endpoint (within a small tolerance). In our experimental protocol, every trial is completed regardless of the number of takeovers: when a takeover occurs, the safety operator manually guides 17 the robot back to a safe pose and returns control to the autonomous policy. The run then continues from that point. This ensures that all metrics (takeover rate, trajectory consistency, VLM–planner agreement) are computed over the full route for every method, enabling fair comparison. 

D Fusion Design Choices, Sensitivity, and Ablation 

This appendix justifies the three design knobs of the fusion layer (Sec. 3.3) and reports the corre-sponding sensitivity sweeps and ablations. All numbers are mean position error (m) from closed-loop simulation under the setup described in Sec. B, averaged across 5 seeds and 3 reference-tracking tasks (forward, left-turn, right-turn) unless otherwise noted, with planner corruption ϵ=0 .3.

D.1 Why Horizon-Truncated Similarity 

A stale VLM trajectory of duration H has, by the time the response arrives, already been consumed by ∆t seconds of robot motion, leaving an H−∆t overlap with the fresh candidates. We project the current robot pose onto the stale polyline, compute remaining arclength, and truncate the comparison to that overlap (Eq. 1). Comparing the fresh candidate against the full stale polyline instead would waste overlap on a phantom future tail the VLM neither saw nor reasoned about. Tab. 4 confirms this on the left-turn task at ∆t=2 s: horizon-aware similarity is the strongest setting for Score Fusion and is competitive for Probability Fusion under decay-off; the performance—Probability Fusion + horizon-aware + decay-on (3.565)—falls within the spread of the table and is dominated by the decay axis (Sec. D.2). 

D.2 Why Exponential Staleness Decay 

A single time constant τdecay in w(∆ t) = exp( −∆t/τ decay ) is more interpretable than a piecewise or polynomial schedule, and a soft cutoff matters because network latency is heavy-tailed (Fig. 8): a hard threshold would flip advice between fully-trusted and ignored at the worst possible moments. The right reading of decay is robustness insurance under real-world drift , not an unconditional accu-racy gain. In our delayed-oracle sim the VLM never changes its mind, so its advice is never wrong, and any time-discount over-penalises advice that is still useful—decay-off is therefore slightly better than decay-on at ∆t=2 s in Tab. 4. In real deployment, where a VLM’s stale answer can become actively wrong as the scene evolves, decay is what bounds the damage. The heatmap below sweeps 

τdecay against the fusion weight λ; it is monotone in both axes, and the operating point used elsewhere in the paper sits inside the stable plateau rather than on a fragile peak. Table 4: Similarity-mode and staleness-decay ablation. Mean position error (m) on left-turn task, 

∆t=2 s, averaged over 5 seeds, ϵ=0 .3. “Decay on” uses τ =3 s; “decay off” uses τ →∞ (similarity term applied without time-discounting). Policy Similarity mode Decay on ( τ =3 ) Decay off ( τ →∞ )Score Fusion pointwise (arclen) 3.521 3.530 Score Fusion candidate →stale polyline 3.505 3.501 Score Fusion horizon-aware (ours) 3.485 3.456 

Probability Fusion pointwise (arclen) 3.556 3.504 Probability Fusion candidate →stale polyline 3.530 3.470 Probability Fusion horizon-aware (ours) 3.565 3.457 D.3 Hyperparameter Heatmap: τdecay vs. λ

Tab. 5 reports Score Fusion mean position error at ∆t=2 s, sweeping the staleness time constant 

τdecay and the fusion weight λ. The surface is monotone in both axes: error decreases as λ increases (more VLM influence) and as τdecay increases (slower staleness decay). There is no pathological 18 corner. Our default operating point (τ =3 , λ =1) sits inside the stable plateau rather than on a fragile peak, supporting the claim that the choice is not cherry-picked. Table 5: Score Fusion sensitivity to τdecay and λ. Mean position error (m) at ∆t=2 s, averaged across 3 tasks × 5 seeds, ϵ=0 .3. Lower is better. 

τdecay \ λ 0.1 0.5 1 2 5 10 1 s 3.093 3.065 3.058 3.020 2.991 2.932 2 s 3.070 3.036 3.012 2.984 2.896 2.781 3 s 3.070 3.027 2.997 2.969 2.812 2.754 5 s 3.065 3.016 2.990 2.932 2.792 2.720 8 s 3.065 3.011 2.983 2.914 2.772 2.702 

E Hyperparameters 

Table 6: Fusion hyperparameters (real-world deployment defaults). Parameter Symbol Value Staleness decay constant τ 5 s Similarity distance scale dscale 0.3 m Score Fusion weight λ 1.0 Probability Fusion weight λ 3.0 Similarity softmax temperature Tvlm 1.0 Hard staleness timeout – 5 s 

F Qualitative Results: When VLM Helps Most 

We observe the largest open-loop ADE improvements in scenarios where the planner proposes at least one good candidate but assigns it a low score due to limited semantic scene understanding. Common categories include: • Off-limits surface boundaries : grass/dirt/planter edges where the planner argmax drifts off side-walk but a safe sidewalk-centered candidate exists. • Pedestrian interactions : yielding and choosing a path that maintains clearance (especially when candidates overlap in geometry but differ in safety). • Forks and junctions : selecting the branch consistent with the goal direction while staying on the walkable surface. • Occlusion and ambiguity : preferring conservative stop/slow candidates when visibility is poor. Fig. 9 shows representative examples where the VLM selects a substantially better trajectory than the planner’s top-scored candidate. In the top-left panel, the planner drifts toward the edge of the sidewalk while the VLM centers the robot on the path (2.5 m ADE improvement). The top-right panel shows a similar surface-boundary scenario at night, where the VLM keeps the robot safely centered between the curb and wall (2.3 m improvement). The bottom-left panel illustrates a cross-walk approach: the VLM identifies a car and selects a trajectory that stays on the paved path toward the crosswalk (2.0 m improvement). In the bottom-right panel, the VLM maintains a respectful distance from a pedestrian on the sidewalk (1.1 m improvement). In all four cases, the planner’s candidate set contains a good trajectory but the planner assigns it a low score; the VLM’s semantic reasoning—identifying surface boundaries, vehicles, and pedestrians—recovers the gap. 19 VLM selects: 38 

Planner selects: 8 

ADE improvement: 2.5m 

{

"action": "select_trajectory", 

"critical_object": [], 

"reason": "Trajectory 38 follows the center of 

the sidewalk, making the most progress while 

maintaining a safe distance from the edges and 

obstacles.", 

"selected_index": 38 

}

VLM selects: 32 

Planner selects: 10 

ADE improvement: 2.3m 

{

"action": "select_trajectory", 

"critical_object": [], 

"reason": "Trajectory 32 makes the most forward 

progress while staying safely centered on the 

sidewalk, away from both the curb and the wall.", 

"selected_index": 32 

}

VLM selects: 6 

Planner selects: 10 

ADE improvement: 2.0m 

VLM selects: 41 

Planner selects: 8 

ADE improvement: 1.1m 

{

"action": "select_trajectory", 

"critical_object": ["car"], 

"reason": "The robot is approaching a crosswalk 

at night. Trajectory 6 makes good progress toward 

the goal (located ahead, slightly left) while 

staying on the paved path and heading toward the 

crosswalk. A car is visible on the right with 

bright headlights, but it does not immediately 

obstruct this path.", 

"selected_index": 6

}

{

"action": "select_trajectory", 

"critical_object": ["pedestrian"], 

"reason": "The robot is on a sidewalk with a

pedestrian walking ahead on the right. Trajectory 

41 is a safe forward path that stays on the paved 

surface and maintains a respectful distance from 

the pedestrian while making good progress.", 

"selected_index": 41 

}Figure 9: Qualitative examples: when VLM selection helps most. Four scenarios where the VLM outperforms the planner’s argmax, with JSON outputs showing VLM reasoning. Top-left : sidewalk centering (VLM selects trajectory 38 over planner’s 8; 2.5 m ADE improvement). Top-right : night navigation near curb and wall (trajectory 32 vs. planner’s 10; 2.3 m improvement). Bottom-left :crosswalk approach with a car visible (trajectory 6 vs. planner’s 10; 2.0 m improvement). Bottom-right : pedestrian interaction on sidewalk (trajectory 41 vs. planner’s 8; 1.1 m improvement). In each case, the planner’s candidate set contains the correct trajectory but the scoring function assigns it a low rank; the VLM’s semantic understanding recovers the gap. 20 G VLM Prompt 

Figure 10: Trajectory-selection prompt (system/user text) and example outputs. The actual request includes the overlay image in addition to this text. 

SYSTEM PROMPT You are a navigation assistant controlling a ground robot . Robot footprint : assume the robot is 0.80 m wide ( use this as the clearance envelope ) . At each step , a local planner proposes multiple candidate trajectories ( shown in an overlay image ) . Each candidate trajectory is apolyline of 20 waypoints sampled at 5 Hz ( dt =0.2 s ) , representing ~4 seconds of future motion . Your job is to choose ONE action for the next step . Task : select a candidate trajectory index that is SAFE and makes progress toward the goal . IMPORTANT : candidates are short - horizon (~4 seconds ) . You do NOT need to reach the goal in one step ; instead choose a trajectory that moves toward the goal direction while staying safe . Decision procedure : 1) Scene understanding first : identify sidewalk / path vs grass / dirt / planters , and any pedestrians / obstacles . 2) HARD REJECT any trajectory that goes onto grass / off - limits surface or too close to a pedestrian / obstacle . 3) Only among the remaining safe options , use goal geometry ( progress / angle ) as atie - breaker . 4) If you are unsure whether a trajectory stays on sidewalk ( ambiguous ) , choose asafer option or stop . If none look safe , choose stop . If the image is missing / unclear or you cannot decide , choose stop . Sometimes a very short trajectory indicates a ’ stop - like ’ action . In that case , prefer returning {" action ":" select_trajectory " ," selected_index ": < that short trajectory index >} rather than returning stop . Common critical objects / hazards to consider ( not exhaustive ) : - people / pedestrians ( including children ) - cars / trucks / buses / motorcycles - bicycles / scooters - intersections / crosswalks / merging traffic - construction cones / barriers - utility pole / signpost / bollard - curb edge / drop - off / fall risk - stairs / steep slope - grass / off - limits area - loose dirt / gravel / sand / heavy leaves ( low traction / not a sidewalk ) - parked vehicles opening doors - clutter / boxes / trash cans - animals - occlusion / blind corner / poor visibility Intention / driving style : - Do not drive / walk on grass . - Prefer paved sidewalks / paths ; avoid loose dirt , gravel , sand , or heavy leaf piles . - Yield to humans and give them right - of - way . - Stop at intersections when uncertain or when crossing traffic / pedestrians may be present . - Avoid colliding with any object . - If anything looks unsafe or ambiguous , prefer the safest option ; if none look safe , choose stop . Candidate table columns ( planner confidence intentionally hidden ) : - index : the trajectory label shown in the overlay image ( use it for selected_index ) . - traj_dist_m : total path length of the trajectory ( meters ) . - end_xy : trajectory endpoint in robot frame ( x_forward , y_left ) in meters . - end_goal_dist_m : distance from trajectory endpoint to the goal ( meters ) . - goal_ang_diff_deg : absolute angle difference between endpoint direction and goal direction ( degrees ) . - progress_m : progress toward the goal = goal_distance - end_goal_dist_m ( meters ) . NOTE : end_goal_dist_m / goal_ang_diff_deg / progress_m are pure geometry and do NOT account for obstacles / off - limits areas . Goal semantics : - The magenta marker labeled ’ GOAL ’ indicates the desired navigation target in the robot frame . 

21 - The goal can be far beyond the 4 - second candidate horizon and may be off - screen . - Choose a candidate that moves TOWARD the goal ( good progress / angle ) while remaining safe . - Do NOT treat the goal marker as a physical object you must reach immediately . - IMPORTANT : do NOT choose a trajectory just because its index label is closest to the GOAL marker . Use the table + image . Legend : - Camera : front - facing fisheye (~100 deg FOV ) . Distortion near the image edges is normal . - Colored polylines are candidate trajectories . - Each trajectory endpoint is marked with a small colored dot . - Each trajectory has a number label near its endpoint : that number is the candidate index . - The number label background color matches the trajectory color ( use this to match label and line ) . - If a label is moved for readability , a thin leader line connects the label to the endpoint dot . - The magenta marker labeled ’ GOAL ’ is the goal ( may be absent if no goal is provided ) . - The robot is at the bottom of the image ; forward is upward . Return exactly ONE action : Schema : {" critical_object ":[...] , " reason ":"..." , " action ":" select_trajectory | stop " , " selected_index ": < int | null >} Reason requirements : - Keep " reason " short - Use less than 50 words Examples ( copy this key order exactly ) : {" critical_object ": [] , " reason ": " Path 8 goes toward the goal and makes good progress while staying on sidewalk ." , " action ": " select_trajectory " , "selected_index ": 8} {" critical_object ": [" pedestrian "] , " reason ": " Pedestrian crossing ahead . Path 3curves around them safely ." , " action ": " select_trajectory " , " selected_index ": 3} {" critical_object ": [" construction " , " blocked_path "] , " reason ": " All trajectories lead into blocked area ." , " action ": " stop " , " selected_index ": null } Rules : - If action =" select_trajectory " , selected_index must be the trajectory index shown in the image . - If action is " stop " , set selected_index to null . - If there are no critical objects , set " critical_object ": []. Return ONLY valid JSON . Do not include any extra text . USER PROMPT (text portion; the request also includes the overlay image) Goal : - Text : < optional goal text > - Vector ( robot frame ) : x_forward = < gx > m , y_left = < gy > m- Bearing : <deg > deg (0= forward , + left ) - Distance : < d_goal > mNumber of candidates shown : <K > Candidate trajectories shown in image : index | traj_dist_m | end_xy | end_goal_dist_m | goal_ang_diff_deg |progress_m ... | ... m | ( ... , ... ) | ... m | ... deg |... m MODEL OUTPUT (examples) {" critical_object ": [] , " reason ": " Stays on sidewalk and makes progress toward the goal ." , " action ": " select_trajectory " , " selected_index ": 11} {" critical_object ": [" pedestrian "] , " reason ": " Pedestrian ahead ; no candidate maintains safe clearance ." , " action ": " stop " , " selected_index ": null } 

22