Title: Task Robustness via Re-Labelling Vision-Action Robot Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10918v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 01:08:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Task Robustness via Re-Labelling Vision-Action Robot Data 

> †

Artur Kuramshin 1,2 , Özgür Aslan 1,2 , Cyrus Neary 1,2,3 , Glen Berseth 1,2 

Abstract — The recent trend in scaling models for robot learning has resulted in impressive policies that can perform various manipulation tasks and generalize to novel scenarios. However, these policies continue to struggle with following instructions, likely due to the limited linguistic and action sequence diversity in existing robotics datasets. This paper introduces Task Robustness via RE-Labelling Vision-Action Robot Data (TREAD), a scalable framework that leverages large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to augment existing robotics datasets without additional data collection, harnessing the transferable knowledge embedded in these models. Our approach leverages a pretrained VLM through three stages: generating semantic sub-tasks from original instruction labels and initial scenes, segmenting demonstration videos conditioned on these sub-tasks, and producing diverse instructions that incorporate object properties, effectively decomposing longer demonstrations into grounded language-action pairs. We fur-ther enhance robustness by augmenting the data with linguisti-cally diverse versions of the text goals. Evaluations on LIBERO demonstrate that policies trained on our augmented datasets exhibit improved performance on novel, unseen tasks and goals. Our results show that TREAD enhances both planning generalization through trajectory decomposition and language-conditioned policy generalization through increased linguistic diversity. Project website: https://akuramshin.github.io/tread. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent trends in robot learning research have demonstrated the importance of data scale and diversity for learning more robust and capable robotic manipulation policies [4, 18, 5]. While the robotics community has made progress in expanding dataset sizes through collaborative efforts, these datasets continue to exhibit limited diversity along certain text and trajectory modalities [26, 16, 30]. This limitation manifests as a weakness of the current models to reliably follow text-based instructions [28, 17, 22]. The dataset modality imbalance persists due to the chal-lenges of collecting diverse, real-world expert demonstrations at scale, often requiring multiple robots and months of op-eration to obtain even modest datasets [7, 16, 11]. However, these vision-based manipulation demonstrations have grown in length and complexity, covering many potential sub-goals per trajectory. While it is possible to manually review the thousands of demonstration videos and solicit human annotators, this will not scale with the demands of modern robotic learning systems. This raises the question: How can we systematically augment existing robotics datasets with greater language-action diversity in a scalable way?                

> 1Mila —Quebec AI Institute, 2Université de Montréal, 3The University of British Columbia, †For correspondence and questions:
> artur.kuramshin@mila.quebec

Recent advances in large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 2, 10] offer a promising new approach to address the language-action diversity challenge in robotics datasets. Using VLMs for robot data augmentation is appealing for two reasons. By leveraging internet-scale pretraining, VLMs are capable of zero-shot generation of contextually appro-priate language labels that are also grounded in the physical scenes depicted in demonstration videos. Second, these mod-els can effectively reason about temporal sequences in videos [1, 2, 36, 10], enabling segmentation of demonstrations into meaningful sub-tasks. This capability allows for decompos-ing existing demonstrations into more granular language-action segments, effectively increasing the diversity of our training data without requiring additional data collection. Motivated by the strong capabilities of large-scale pre-trained VLMs, we propose Task Robustness via RE-Labelling Vision-Action Robot Data (TREAD), a frame-work to augment robotics datasets. TREAD shown in Fig-ure 1 operates in an iterative three-stage process, where the model’s outputs from previous steps are fed back as inputs to the next: First, a pretrained VLM analyzes the original instruction labels and the initial scenes to generate a sequence of semantic sub-task descriptions that collectively accomplish the original goal. Then the demonstration videos are processed by the the VLM to temporally segment the trajectories, identifying which portions of the demonstration correspond to each sub-task description. Lastly, the VLM generates diverse instructions for these sub-taks incorporat-ing object properties and spatial relationships conditioned on the initial scenes of the sub-tasks and the semantic sub-task descriptions. This temporal-semantic alignment creates multiple language-conditioned sub-demonstrations from each original demonstration from the offline dataset. In this work, we make two key contributions: (1) a novel framework to utilize iterative querying of a VLM to augment and diversify the original dataset, and (2) the augmented dataset obtained by applying our framework, which will be released to facilitate future research. In our experiments with the LIBERO dataset [20] we show that the resulting augmented dataset improves zero-shot performance and text goal following of the vision-language-action policy Octo [27] and π0-FAST [28]. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Robot learning datasets 

Recently, the robotics community has invested substantial effort into collecting larger manipulation datasets. While  

> arXiv:2606.10918v1 [cs.RO] 9 Jun 2026 Fig. 1. TREAD uses a large-scale VLM to programmatically cut trajectories at sub-goals, label those sub-goals and add variations to the goal-text.

earlier datasets such as RT-1 [7], MT-Opt [15], and BC-Z [13] boast significant numbers of trajectories, they lack diversity in tasks and scenes, which is more important for generalization [16, 19, 32]. Responding to this need, several works have focused on increasing dataset diversity by scaling data collection, including BridgeV2 [30], DROID [16], and RDT-1B [22]. These newer datasets not only collect data across more scenes but also demonstrate more complicated tasks consisting of multiple meaningful sub-goals. However, this advancement creates a new challenge: although the number of tasks has increased, the language diversity is diluted by the larger amount of image-action frames per instruction due to longer trajectories. Our work presents a generic framework for expanding the language-image-action distribution of any robotic manipulation dataset without requiring additional data collection, effectively reducing this dilution problem. 

B. Vision-language-action models as scalable robot policies 

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have shown increasing capabilities in complex visual tasks such as state identi-fication, reasoning, and visual question answering [21, 3, 1, 10]. Inspired by the success of VLMs, the robotics community adopted similar multi-modal architectures for imitation learning [7, 27, 14, 22]. More recent methods start from a pre-trained VLM backbone to leverage internet-scale pretraining [18, 5]. Followup works have explored archi-tectural modifications [17, 22, 28] to improve performance in instruction generalization and following. In contrast, our work improves existing policy performance through data augmentation alone. Therefore, our method can be used alongside any policy architecture. 

C. Data augmentation methods. 

Data augmentation is a powerful technique for enhancing model robustness and generalization by generating addi-tional synthetic training examples from existing data. In robot learning, augmentation methods have developed along three main dimensions: visual augmentation [4, 33, 25, 9], language augmentation [35, 24, 31], and trajectory aug-mentation [35, 8, 29]. Our work bridges language and trajectory augmentation by using VLMs to both relabel trajectories and identify meaningful sub-task motions within longer demonstrations. DIAL [31], which is most similar to our approach in terms of language augmentation, relies on a predetermined set of labels and requires fine-tuning on related robotics data. In contrast, our method leverages zero-shot VLM capabilities. NILS [6] is another framework that incorporates multiple large models and heuristics to segment and relabel trajectories, whereas our method (TREAD) relies on a single iteratively queried VLM without heuristics, making it simpler to reproduce. Lastly, SPRINT [35], another closely related work, focuses on composing shorter skills into longer sequences. However, our approach does the opposite by decomposing longer-horizon demonstrations into meaningful sub-tasks. This makes our method particularly suitable for enhancing language-action diversity in open-source robotics datasets. III. M ETHOD 

Here we describe how we design TREAD to segment and stitch robotics data, in three stages: (1) segmentation 

using a VLM to process trajectories for semantic and motion-based properties to find key sub-goal transitions, (2) labeling 

of the new sub-trajectories with sub-goals and to augment the original dataset with language diversity, and (3) train 

a vision-language-action model on the resulting dataset to improve robustness. The pseudocode for TREAD is shown in Algorithm 1. 

A. Problem Formulation 

We assume access to an offline dataset D of robot trajec-tories labelled with natural language task instructions. For-mally, we define a dataset D = [( τn, ℓ n)] Nn=1 consisting of Nlabeled trajectories, where each trajectory τn = [( ont , ant )] Tt=1 

contains observation-action pairs over T timesteps. Here, ont

and ant denote the image observation and action at time t

respectively, and ℓn denotes the natural language instruction describing the task demonstrated in trajectory τn. We then train a policy π(· | ot, ℓ ) via imitation learning to gener-ate action distributions that mimic demonstrated behavior. Specifically, we look at models trained by minimizing the bahvior cloning objective: 

ˆπ∗ = arg min 

> π

X

> (τ,ℓ )∈D

X

> (ot,at)∈τ

LBC (π(· | ot, ℓ ), at)

where LBC denotes a supervised loss (e.g., negative log-likelihood) between the predicted action distribution and the demonstrated action. We are interested in using data augmentation to improve the learned policy’s generalization performance. Specifically, we address the question: how can we augment D with addi-tional trajectory-instruction pairs (τ, ℓ ) derived from existing demonstrations, without requiring any new data collection? 

B. Decomposition of Trajectories 

Although our framework does not depend on a specific VLM, in this work we use Gemini Pro 2.5 [10]. Gemini is a multi-modal model that can take as input images, videos, and text, and output text. Given a trajectory τn completing a long-horizon task ℓn, we first derive semantic sub-tasks and then identify which parts of the trajectory complete those sub-tasks. We found that just asking the VLM to segment the video in one-shot provided poor results; providing the model with subtasks resulted in qualitatively better video segmentation. We accomplish this by chaining two VLM inference calls shown in Figure 2. First, we prompt the VLM to create a plan of sub-task motion labels [˜ℓ1

> n

, ˜ℓ2

> n

, . . . , ˜ℓzn 

> n

],given the higher-level task ℓn, and the first frame of the trajectory on 

> 1

for grounding and context. Here zn denotes the number of sub-tasks that are required to complete task 

ℓn in the scene as determined by the VLM. For example, the task “place bowl in the top drawer” will require a different number of sub-task motions depending on whether the top drawer is currently closed or open and the algorithm should identify this and produce three sub-tasks instead of two. Subsequently, we query the model with the video of the trajectory and prompt it to retrieve the starting and ending seconds at which the previously identified sub-tasks occur. As a result, we now have a process by which we can decompose a labeled trajectory (τ, ℓ ) into an ordered set of labeled sub-trajectories [(˜ τ 1, ˜ℓ1), (˜ τ 2, ˜ℓ2), ..., (˜ τ z , ˜ℓz )] , where 

˜τ ⊂ τ denotes a sub-trajectory. Finally, we can now process 

D to construct a new decomposed dataset: 

˜DA = [(˜ τ 11 , ˜ℓ11), . . . , (˜ τ z1 

> 1

, ˜ℓz1 

> 1

), . . . , (˜ τ 1

> n

, ˜ℓ1

> n

), . . . , (˜ τ zn 

> n

, ˜ℓzn 

> n

)] 

For details on the full prompts, see Appendix I. Practically, we decompose a dataset of 82 unique scene-instruction tasks into 146 subtasks (see Section IV-A for details on the dataset). 

C. Instruction Diversity and Data Augmentation 

Recent research has highlighted instruction following as a weakness of current VLA models [17, 28, 22], attributing the difficulty to the models paying more attention to visual inputs than the language goal. While the mentioned works address the problem algorithmically, we argue that additional textual diversity will help robustness to language. Many robotics datasets have considerably small linguistic diversity which potentially leads to policies being overly sensitive to instruction wording. We use the generated sub-trajectories to augment D. We consider the following textual augmentation method for language diversity: 

Grounded textual diversity. We can enhance linguistic diversity by leveraging VLMs to generate visually grounded paraphrases of instructions. For each sub-trajectory (˜ τi, ˜ℓi),we prompt the VLM with both the original instruction ˜ℓi

and the first visual frame from ˜τi, requesting k language alternatives that preserve the task semantics. As shown in Figure 2, including the image in the context allows the model to incorporate spatial relationships and perceivable charac-teristics for more accurate goal diversity beyond just using synonyms. For instance, given an instruction “pick up the blue coffee mug," our VLM might generate alternatives like 

“grasp the small coffee mug" (object attributes) or “retrieve the coffee mug next to the laptop," (spatial relationships). We apply this language augmentation to our already decomposed dataset ˜DA and denote the resulting dataset ˜DH :

˜DH = [(˜ τ 11 , ˆℓ11), . . . , (˜ τ z1 

> 1

, ˆℓz1 

> 1

), . . . , (˜ τ 1

> n

, ˆℓ1

> n

), . . . (˜ τ zn 

> n

, ˆℓzn 

> n

)] 

See Appendix I for the templated prompt we use for grounded textual diversity. 

Algorithm 1 The TREAD algorithm                                                                                                                                             

> Input: Robotic dataset Dand VLM G
> 1: function TREAD( D,G)
> 2: ˜DA←DECOMPOSE (D,G)
> 3: ˜DH←DIVERSIFY (˜DA,G)
> 4: Train policy πAon mixture of Dand DA
> 5: Train policy πHon mixture of Dand DH
> 6: function DECOMPOSE (D,G)▷Section III-B
> 7: ˜DA←{}
> 8: for trajectory-instruction pair (τn, ℓ n)in Ddo
> 9: o1←first observation in τn
> 10: v←[o1, . . . , oT](video of trajectory τn)
> 11: [˜ℓ1
> n, . . . , ˜ℓzn]← G (o1, ℓ n)
> 12: [(˜ τ1
> n,˜ℓ1
> n), . . . , (˜ τzn,˜ℓzn)] ← G (v,[˜ℓ1
> n, . . . , ˜ℓzn])
> 13: ˜DA←˜DA∪[(˜ τ1
> n,˜ℓ1
> n), . . . , (˜ τzn,˜ℓzn)]
> 14: return ˜DA
> 15: function DIVERSIFY (˜DA,G)▷Section III-C
> 16: ˜DH←{}
> 17: for sub-trajectory–instruction pair (˜ τin,˜ℓin)in ˜DAdo
> 18: o1←first observation in ˜τin
> 19: ˆℓin←choose one from G(o1,˜ℓin)
> 20: ˜DH←˜DH∪(˜ τin,ˆℓin)
> 21: return ˜DHFig. 2. TREAD pipeline overview. Given dataset Dof Nlabeled trajectories [( τn, ℓ n)] Nn=1 , TREAD decomposes the dataset into semantically meaningful sub-trajectories through three stages: (1) Subtask Decomposition : Given the original task instruction ℓand initial frame o1, we prompt the VLM to generate a sequence of sub-task labels [˜ℓ1,˜ℓ2, . . . , ˜ℓzn]. (2) Motion Segmentation : The VLM identifies temporal boundaries for each sub-task, resulting in a set of labeled sub-trajectories [(˜ τ1,˜ℓ1), . . . , (˜ τzn,˜ℓzn)] . (3) Language Diversity : The VLM generates diverse paraphrases for each sub-task instruction by leveraging visual context to incorporate object properties (color, shape, material) and spatial relationships (relative positions, orientations).

D. Training a Vision-Language-Action Model 

We study the quality of our dataset augmentation by training vision-language-action manipulation policies on the augmented data. Using the datasets generated by TREAD, we finetune two generalist robot policies: Octo (specifically Octo-Small 1.5) [27] and π0-FAST [28]. Octo is a diffusion-based policy trained on the Open-X dataset [26], while π0-FAST leverages a pre-trained VLM backbone, PaliGemma [3], trained on the cross-embodied robot data mixture from 

π0 [5], with actions discretized using the FAST tokenization scheme. To determine the dataset weighting ratio such that the finetuned model achieves the best performance across the original full trajectories ( D) and relabeled sub-trajectories ( ˜DA/ ˜DH ), we conducted ablation studies across multiple mixing ratios. We evaluated ratios ( D: ˜DA/ ˜DH ) of 1:2 , 1:1.5 

and 1:1.1 . The final ratio was selected using Re-Mix [12]. For all experiments reported in Section IV-A, we use the best-performing weighting ratio for each respective data mixture. Detailed performance results for each weighting ratio across the evaluation tasks are provided in Appendix II. For all data mixtures, we employ consistent finetuning parameters across models. We finetune Octo for 50,000 steps, batch size of 256, using a linear warmup followed by cosine decay [23] with a peak learning rate of 3 × 10 −4. For π0-FAST, we perform full finetuning for 30,000 steps with a batch size of 32, employing the same cosine decay schedule with warmup but with a peak learning rate of 2.5 × 10 −5.Based on test performance, we use checkpoints at step 30,000 for Octo and step 15,000 for π0-FAST across all dataset ablations (see Section IV). IV. R ESULTS 

In our evaluation, we design experiments to investigate the effectiveness of training an agent on a dataset augmented by TREAD toward generalizing to unseen tasks. Specifically, our experiments answer the following research questions: (1) Does TREAD’s trajectory decomposition increase planning generalization? (2) Does language augmentation help policy generalization to text-based goals? We focus on robot manipulation and evaluate our method on the image-based dataset LIBERO [20], a simulation benchmark designed for studying lifelong learning in robotic manipulation. The use of LIBERO to evaluate VLA models pretrained on real-world data is a common practice to show the capabilities of these models [28, 18, 17]. Due to resource constraints, we evaluate our method on a subset of LIBERO as described below. 

A. Experimental Setup 

In our experiments, we evaluate the effects of both tra-jectory decomposition and instruction diversity on policy performance through ablation studies using the following data mixtures: 1) Finetuned Octo/ π0-FAST with no augmentations (Original Fine-tuned) : We finetune the Octo/ π0-FAST on the unaltered subset of LIBERO-100 trajectories 

D. This serves as our primary comparison point, ex-pected to perform adequately on in-distribution task-instruction pairs but struggle with language-following in novel scenes or instruction text variations. Fig. 3. Example visualization of the sub-task keypoints produced by TREAD for the trajectory “ Put the white mug on the plate and put the chocolate pudding to the left of the plate ". Each frame (from left to right) corresponds to the first frame of the sub-task (labeled above). The sub-task labels in order are: (1) “ Grasp the white mug " (2) “ Lift the white mug " (3) “ Move the white mug to the plate " (4) “ Place the white mug on the plate " (5) “ Grasp the small rectangular object " (6) “ Lift the small rectangular object " (7) “ Move the small rectangular object to the left of the plate " (8) “ Place the small rectangular object on the table. "

2) Finetuned Octo/ π0-FAST with Trajectory Decom-position (TREAD w/o diverse labels) : We finetune Octo/ π0-FAST on a mixture of the unaltered dataset 

D and its decomposition ˜DA. This ablation isolates the effect of trajectory decomposition, which should help the policy perform tasks in new environments by leveraging subtask compositions seen during training, even when the complete task-environment pairing is novel. 3) Finetuned Octo/ π0-FAST with Trajectory Decom-position + Label Diversity (TREAD) : We finetune Octo/ π0-FAST on a mixture of the unaltered dataset 

D and its linguistically enriched decomposition ˜DH .This full implementation of our method is expected to handle both novel environments and textual variations by bringing diverse text instructions in distribution. 

LIBERO. The LIBERO benchmark [20] consists of four task suites that are designed to examine distribution shifts in the object types, the spatial arrangement of objects, the task goals, or the mixture of the previous three. For our experiments, we focus on the LIBERO-100 task suite, which contains 100 tasks involving diverse object interactions and versatile skills with 50 human-teleoperated demonstrations each. In LIBERO-100, tasks are defined by the combination of scene and instruction, meaning that identical instructions performed in different scenes are treated as distinct tasks. Importantly, we utilize the full LIBERO-100 suite rather than the smaller subsets employed by recent works [18, 28]. This larger benchmark presents a more challenging evaluation setting that reduces the risk of overfitting and provides a more rigorous test of our method’s ability to improve motion and language generalization (see Section IV-B). Due to resource constraints, we labeled five demon-strations per task and omitted any tasks performed in 

STUDY_SCENE s for a total of 570 trajectories. An example of a labeled trajectory is shown in Figure 3. To evaluate our research questions, we defined two sets of novel tasks within LIBERO: 

B. Evaluation Tasks 

Motion Generalization (MG) : For research question (1), we created new instruction-scene pairs by taking existing language instructions and pairing them with compatible but previously unpaired scenes. For example, the instruction 

“open the top drawer of the cabinet" is paired with scene 

KITCHEN_SCENE4 containing a cabinet, with this specific combination not appearing in the training data. These tasks will evaluate whether trajectory decomposition helps the agent transfer learned skills to novel environmental contexts. Importantly, these new instruction-scene pairs also evaluate the model’s language-following capability, as the model must avoid defaulting to previously trained tasks from those scenes and instead execute the specified instruction. We create 7 such novel scene-instruction environments within the LIBERO framework. 

Language Generalization (LG) : For research question (2), we created linguistically modified versions of existing LIBERO-100 tasks. These modifications included variations such as reordering clauses around conjunctions (changing 

“turn on the stove and put the moka pot on it" to “put the moka pot on the stove and turn it on" ) or removing unnec-essary object specifiers when context makes them redundant (changing “close the bottom drawer of the cabinet" to “close the drawer" ). These variations assess whether our language augmentation strategies improve policy robustness to vari-ations in instruction wording. We found 14 existing tasks within LIBERO-100 that satisfied our criteria for instruction modification. We evaluate all dataset ablations across both test cases. For each task, we conduct 30 policy rollouts and report the average success rate. To provide a more nuanced understand-ing of policy capabilities, we separately analyze performance on single-goal tasks (e.g. “close the drawer" ) and two-goal tasks (e.g. “put the bowl in the drawer of the cabinet and close it" ). For two-goal tasks, we report both partial success (completing only one goal) and complete success (achieving both goals). 

C. Increased Zero-Shot Performance 

The Motion Generalization results in Table I demonstrate TREAD’s effectiveness when policies encounter familiar in-structions in novel environments. Both TREAD and TREAD w/o diverse labels outperform Original Fine-tuned across Single Goal tasks, with TREAD achieving 15% and 6% TABLE I                     

> LIBERO TASK PERFORMANCE RESULTS .SUCCESS RATES (SR) WITH STANDARD ERROR ACROSS THE CUSTOM EVALUATION TASK SUITES (SEE
> SECTION IV-B) AND LIBERO-10 WITHIN THE LIBERO FRAMEWORK [20]. R ESULTS INCLUDE POLICIES FINE -TUNED ON DIFFERENT DATA MIXTURES :ORIGINAL TRAJECTORY DATA (O RIGINAL FINE -TUNED ), MIXTURE OF THE UNALTERED DATASET AND ITS DECOMPOSITION (TREAD W/ODIV .), AND MIXTURE OF THE UNALTERED DATASET AND ITS LINGUISTICALLY ENRICHED DECOMPOSITION (TREAD). B OLD AND UNDERLINED VALUES INDICATE BEST AND SECOND -BEST PERFORMANCE .

Test Case Metric (%) π0-FAST [28] Octo [27] Original Fine-tuned TREAD w/o div. TREAD Original Fine-tuned TREAD w/o div. TREAD 

Language Generalization 

Single Goal SR 47 ±20 77 ±7 67 ±14 82 ±2 76 ±17 91 ±6

1 of 2 SR 63 ±11 62 ±10 67 ±9 76 ±6 70 ±6 77 ±4

2 of 2 SR 36 ±8 35 ±7 39 ±10 30 ±7 28 ±5 31 ±5

Motion Generalization 

Single Goal SR 28 ±18 31 ±20 34 ±16 7±4 27 ±10 22 ±15 

1 of 2 SR 73 ±3 82 ±11 82 ±9 13 ±4 50 ±10 43 ±3

2 of 2 SR 7±3 0±0 0±0 0±0 0±0 0±0

LIBERO-10 1 of 2 SR 83 ±9 72 ±12 74 ±8 76 ±5 69 ±6 72 ±4

2 of 2 SR 57 ±10 43 ±12 57 ±10 40 ±7 41 ±4 38 ±4

Average SR 49 ±10 50 ±11 53 ±10 41 ±12 45 ±10 47 ±11 

higher success rates on Octo and π0-FAST respectively. This shows that the automatic segmentation of TREAD is able to provide more trajectory and goal diversity which drives additional generalization across more tasks. The benefits of trajectory decomposition become more pronounced for complex, multi-step tasks. In two-goal sce-narios, TREAD achieves substantially higher first-goal com-pletion rates - 30% improvement for Octo and 9% for 

π0-FAST - compared to baseline fine-tuning. The wider performance gap for multi-goal tasks likely stems from the increased opportunities for sub-trajectory overlap between training and test scenarios. Notably, the performance gains are more substantial for Octo, which lacks the pretrained vision-language understanding of π0-FAST, suggesting that trajectory decomposition provides particularly valuable in-ductive biases for models without built-in multimodal rea-soning capabilities. 

D. Better Text Goal Following 

The Language Generalization results in Table I reveal TREAD’s ability to handle linguistic variations of famil-liar task-instructions in known environments. In single-goal tasks, TREAD demonstrates substantial improvements over Original Fine-tuned baselines, achieving 20% higher success rates with Octo and 9% with π0-FAST. This improvement provides strong evidence that our grounded textual diversity approach effectively prepares policies for the natural linguis-tic variations. Interestingly, the performance benefits for Language Gen-eralization are most apparent in shorter, single-goal tasks rather than complex multi-step scenarios. This pattern likely reflects the mismatch between the relatively concise lan-guage instructions in our decomposed sub-trajectories and the longer, more complex instructions typical of multi-goal tasks. Additionally, longer-horizon tasks provide more oppor-tunities for compounding errors when policies encounter out-of-distribution language conditioning, making it inherently more challenging to maintain robust language following throughout extended task execution. Importantly, we verify that our augmentation approach does not compromise performance on in-distribution tasks. When evaluated on the in-distribution long-horizon tasks in LIBERO-10, TREAD maintains comparable performance to Original Fine-tuned for two-goal success rates as seen in the last row in Table I. V. C ONCLUSION 

In summary, we presented TREAD, a framework that uses off-the-shelf VLMs to perform a type of trajectory segmentation and then stitching via training a large-scale BC model Octo [27]. We find that fine-tuning Octo on our new dataset improves the performance, especially on more difficult longer horizon tasks and novel tasks not seen during training. Despite these promising results, our work has limitations that point to interesting directions for future research. Our work uses a large closed-source VLM, which limits reproducibility. An important next step would be to evaluate TREAD with open-source alternatives [21, 2, 34] and potentially fine-tune these models specifically on robotics data to improve their embodied understanding. Future work can also explore applying TREAD to larger datasets and larger models. However, our work shows that even with small amounts of properly segmented and aug-mented data there are obvious performance gains for current VLA models. APPENDIX IVLM P ROMPTS 

We provide the templated prompts we use for querying Gemini 2.5 [10] for semantic sub-task breakdown and motion identification in Figure 4, Figure 5, and the template prompt for grounded paraphrasing in Figure 6. The three example tasks used for few-shot prompting motion identification are taken from the LIBERO-90 dataset. Fig. 4. The templated prompt we use for generating semantic sub-tasks. The placeholders <FRAME 1> and <TASK INSTRUCTION> are replaced with the first image of the trajectory and the trajectory instruction, respectively. <VIDEO> 

The video is showing a robot arm performing the task "Put the white mug on the left plate." The task can be broken down into these possible sub-task motions: 1. Grasp the white mug: Approach the white mug. Position the gripper around the body or handle of the mug and close the gripper to grasp it securely. 

2. Lift the white mug: Move the gripper vertically upwards, lifting the mug clear of the table surface and the other mugs. 3. Move the white mug to the right plate: Move the gripper horizontally, carrying the mug across the table until it is positioned directly above the plate on the right. 4. Place the white mug on the right plate: Move the gripper vertically downwards to gently place the white mug onto the surface of the right plate. Open the gripper to release the mug. 

Carefully look at the video and describe the sub-task motions you see being performed by the robot and the corresponding timecodes. Okay, here's the breakdown of the sub-task motions for placing the white mug on the left plate: 

1. 00:00 - 00:03 Grasp the white mug: The robot moves its gripper downwards and positions it around the white mug then closes the gripper to grasp it. 2. 00:03 - 00:04 Lift the white mug The robot lifts the grasped mug vertically upwards, clear of the table. 

3. 00:04 - 00:06 Move the white mug to the right plate: The robot moves the mug horizontally towards the right, positioning it above the right plate. 

4. 00:06 - 00:08 Place the white mug on the right plate: The robot lowers the mug down onto the surface of the right plate and then opens its gripper to release the mug 

> <VIDEO>

You are provided with a video showing a robot arm performing the task <TASK INSTRUCTION». The task can be broken down into these possible sub-task motions: 

<SUB-TASK 1> <SUB-TASK 2> <SUB-TASK Z> 

You need to carefully look at the video and describe the sub-task motions you see being performed by the robot and the corresponding timecodes. Follow these guidelines: 

1. Start off by pointing to no more than 8 items in the image . The answer should follow the json format: [{"point”: <pointy, “label”: <label1>}, ...]. The points are in [y, x] format normalized to 

0-1000. One element a line. 

2. Determine the object movement and the resulting object relations. Explain the object movements. 3. Combine motions for approaching and grasping objects. Also combine motions for placing and releasing objects. 4. Finally, output the sub-tasks that you observe and the corresponding timecodes in the json format: [{"sub_task": <sub-task>, "time_range”: <timecodes>}, 

Fig. 5. The templated prompt we use for recognizing semantic sub-tasks in a trajectory video. We use few-shot prompting by providing the model with 3 example user-model exchanges before the final query prompt (we include only one example for brevity). The placeholders <VIDEO> and 

<TASK INSTRUCTION> are replaced with the trajectory video and the trajectory instruction, respectively. 

Fig. 6. The templated prompt we use for grounded textual diversity (see Section III-C). The placeholders <FRAME 1> and <TASK INSTRUCTION> 

are replaced with the first image of the trajectory and the trajectory instruction, respectively. APPENDIX II DATASET WEIGHTING RATIOS 

To determine the optimal balance between original demon-strations and augmented sub-trajectories, we conducted abla-tions across different dataset mixing ratios. Table II presents results for Octo, showing success rate performance across three task sets as described in Section IV-B. 

TABLE II SUCCESS RATE PERFORMANCE OF OCTO [27] FINETUNED WITH DIFFERENT DATASET WEIGHTING RATIOS FOR (1) TREAD W/O DIVERSE LABELS (D: ˜DA ) AND (2) TREAD WITH DIVERSE LABELS (D: ˜DH ).                                                           

> Test Case Metric (%) 1:2 1:1.5 Re-Mix
> TREAD w/o div. TREAD TREAD w/o div. TREAD TREAD w/o div. TREAD
> Language Generalization
> Single Goal SR 73 89 51 69 76 73 1 of 2 SR 74 79 72 81 72 81 2 of 2 SR 30 30 32 33 30 36
> Motion Generalization
> Single Goal SR 22 20 27 23 25 17 1 of 2 SR 42 40 38 40 49 31 2 of 2 SR 000000
> LIBERO-10 1 of 2 SR 69 77 68 71 74 70 2 of 2 SR 37 41 37 37 41 37

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge the use of Claude Sonnet 4 (Anthropic) for assistance with editing and refining the written presen-tation of this work. All scientific content, methodology, and conclusions remain the original contributions of the authors. We want to acknowledge funding support from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Fonds de recherche du Québec and The Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) and compute support from Digital Research Alliance of Canada, Mila IDT, and NVidia. We would also like to thank John Edwards Leadership Fund (CFI) for funding the purchase of hardware for this project. REFERENCES [1] Josh Achiam et al. “Gpt-4 technical report”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023). [2] Shuai Bai et al. Qwen2.5-VL Technical Report . 2025. arXiv: 2502. 13923 [cs.CV] .[3] Lucas Beyer et al. “Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer”. In: 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07726 (2024). [4] Homanga Bharadhwaj et al. “Roboagent: Generalization and effi-ciency in robot manipulation via semantic augmentations and action chunking”. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . 2024, pp. 4788–4795. [5] Kevin Black et al. π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control . 2025. arXiv: 2410.24164 [cs.LG] .[6] Nils Blank et al. “Scaling Robot Policy Learning via Zero-Shot Labeling with Foundation Models”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning . 2024. [7] Anthony Brohan et al. “Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems .2022. [8] Jingjing Chen et al. Towards Effective Utilization of Mixed-Quality Demonstrations in Robotic Manipulation via Segment-Level Selec-tion and Optimization . 2025. arXiv: 2409.19917 [cs.RO] .[9] Qiuyu Chen et al. “GenAug: Retargeting behaviors to unseen situ-ations via Generative Augmentation”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems . 2023. DOI : 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX. 010 .[10] Gheorghe Comanici et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the Frontier with Advanced Reasoning, Multimodality, Long Context, and Next Gen-eration Agentic Capabilities . 2025. arXiv: 2507.06261 [cs.CL] .[11] Hao-Shu Fang et al. “Rh20t: A comprehensive robotic dataset for learning diverse skills in one-shot”. In: IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation . 2024, pp. 653–660. [12] Joey Hejna et al. “ReMix: Optimizing Data Mixtures for Large Scale Imitation Learning”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning . Vol. 270. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2025, pp. 145–164. [13] Eric Jang et al. “Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning”. In: Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR. 2022, pp. 991–1002. [14] Yunfan Jiang et al. “VIMA: Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Machine Learning .Vol. 202. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2023, pp. 14975–15022. [15] Dmitry Kalashnikov et al. “Scaling Up Multi-Task Robotic Re-inforcement Learning”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning . Vol. 164. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2022, pp. 557–575. [16] Alexander Khazatsky et al. “DROID: A Large-Scale In-The-Wild Robot Manipulation Dataset”. In: Robotics: Science and Systems .2024. [17] Moo Jin Kim, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. “Fine-Tuning Vision-Language-Action Models: Optimizing Speed and Success”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645 (2025). [18] Moo Jin Kim et al. “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 (2024). [19] Fanqi Lin et al. “Data scaling laws in imitation learning for robotic manipulation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18647 (2024). [20] Bo Liu et al. “Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), pp. 44776–44791. [21] Haotian Liu et al. “Visual Instruction Tuning”. In: NeurIPS . 2023. [22] Songming Liu et al. “Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bi-manual manipulation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 (2024). [23] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “SGDR: Stochastic Gradient Descent with Warm Restarts”. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Representations . 2017. [24] Corey Lynch et al. “Interactive Language: Talking to Robots in Real Time”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2023), pp. 1–8. 

> DOI

: 10.1109/LRA.2023.3295255 .[25] Zhao Mandi et al. “Cacti: A framework for scalable multi-task multi-scene visual imitation learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05711 

(2022). [26] Abby O’Neill et al. “Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0”. In: IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation . 2024, pp. 6892– 6903. [27] Octo Model Team et al. “Octo: An Open-Source Generalist Robot Policy”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems . 2024. [28] Karl Pertsch et al. FAST: Efficient Action Tokenization for Vision-Language-Action Models . 2025. arXiv: 2501.09747 [cs.RO] .[29] Divyanshu Raj et al. “Learning Temporally Composable Task Seg-mentations with Language”. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems . 2024, pp. 5195–5202. [30] Homer Rich Walke et al. “Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning .Vol. 229. PMLR. 2023, pp. 1723–1736. [31] Ted Xiao et al. “Robotic Skill Acquisition via Instruction Augmen-tation with Vision-Language Models”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems . 2023. [32] Annie Xie et al. “Decomposing the generalization gap in imitation learning for visual robotic manipulation”. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . 2024, pp. 3153–3160. [33] Tianhe Yu et al. “Scaling Robot Learning with Semantically Imag-ined Experience”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems .2023. DOI : 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.027 .[34] Boqiang Zhang et al. VideoLLaMA 3: Frontier Multimodal Foun-dation Models for Image and Video Understanding . 2025. arXiv: 

2501.13106 [cs.CV] .[35] Jesse Zhang et al. “Sprint: Scalable policy pre-training via lan-guage instruction relabeling”. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . 2024, pp. 9168–9175. [36] Yuanhan Zhang et al. Video Instruction Tuning With Synthetic Data .2024. arXiv: 2410.02713 [cs.CV] .