Title: Vision-Language Model Reasoning for Contextual Semantic Mapping in Intralogistics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24814v2

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:40:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Vision-Language Model Reasoning for Contextual Semantic Mapping in Intralogistics 

Marvin R¨ udt 1,2

marvin.ruedt@kit.edu 

Hao Pang 1,2

hao.pang@kit.edu 

Constantin Enke 1

constantin.enke@kit.edu 

Z¨ azilia Seibold 1

zaezilia.seibold@kit.edu 

Kai Furmans 1

kai.furmans@kit.edu 

Abstract —Autonomous mobile robots operating in intralogis-tics environments rely on geometric maps for localization and navigation, but lack semantic understanding of objects and their contextual properties. We present a contextual semantic mapping pipeline that combines SLAM-based geometric mapping, SAM-based instance segmentation, instance clustering, and VLM multi-view reasoning to produce a contextual semantic map representa-tion encoding geometric structure, object class, and object mov-ability. By aggregating observations across multiple viewpoints and querying a VLM in a zero-shot, open-vocabulary setting, the pipeline infers contextual object properties–here demonstrated through movability–without requiring task-specific training or predefined object categories. We evaluate three VLMs under two prompting strategies and conduct a component-wise analysis of the pipeline. The proposed pipeline achieves 98.93% mIoU for semantic classification and 89.17% mAcc for object movability estimation. Component analysis identifies VLM reasoning as the primary bottleneck for contextual understanding and instance clustering as the main limitation for panoptic performance. The resulting semantic map supports context-aware filtering and robust navigation in dynamic intralogistics environments. 

Index Terms —Semantic mapping, autonomous mobile robots, vision-language models, instance segmentation, open-vocabulary reasoning, intralogistics 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous mobile robots (AMRs) are increasingly de-ployed in indoor environments such as intralogistics systems, where they navigate freely using geometric maps generated by simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [1]. These maps encode the spatial structure of the environment and support localization and path planning, but lack semantic information about objects and infrastructure, limiting higher-level task execution and reasoning [2]–[4]. This limitation is particularly critical in intralogistics sys-tems, which are dynamic and heterogeneous, containing ob-jects such as shelves, pallets, and vehicles whose states change over time. Current systems often struggle to adapt to such changes and may require frequent remapping [5]. Semantic maps must therefore go beyond object categories and capture contextual properties relevant to robot operation, such as movability, functional state, or spatial relationships. 

This research was funded by the InvestBW Innovation Program of the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Labor and Tourism of Baden-W¨ urttemberg, Germany. 

> 1

Institute for Material Handling and Logistics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. 

> 2

These authors contributed equally. 

Classical semantic mapping approaches integrate semantic perception into SLAM pipelines [4], [6], [7], but rely on closed-vocabulary models limited to predefined categories. Recent work explores open-vocabulary mapping using vision-language models (VLMs) [8], [9], enabling more flexible object recognition. However, these methods primarily focus on object identification and lack contextual reasoning about object properties [10], [11]. Approaches integrating founda-tion models such as contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) [12] and the segment anything model (SAM) [13] further improve open-vocabulary perception and class-agnostic segmentation, yet most operate on single images and do not reason across multiple viewpoints or infer higher-level semantic attributes. To address these gaps, we propose a semantic mapping pipeline that integrates geometric mapping, instance segmen-tation, instance clustering, and VLM-based contextual rea-soning, as illustrated in Fig. 1. RGB images provide visual observations for instance segmentation and serve as input for semantic and contextual inference, while 2D laser scans are used to construct a geometric map via SLAM and to localize and aggregate object instances across multiple frames. AVLM then performs open-vocabulary classification and infers contextual properties–in this work, object movability–enabling the distinction between static infrastructure and potentially dynamic objects. The result is a contextual semantic map representation encoding geometric structure, semantic class, and movability. The main contributions of this work are:  

> •

A modular semantic mapping pipeline integrating SLAM, SAM-based instance segmentation, and VLM-based rea-soning for intralogistics environments.  

> •

A multi-view reasoning approach enabling robust open-vocabulary object classification and inference of contex-tual properties such as object movability.  

> •

A contextual semantic map representation that augments geometric maps with semantic class and object movabil-ity.  

> •

A systematic evaluation of individual pipeline compo-nents and their contribution to semantic mapping perfor-mance. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Semantic Mapping in Robotics 

Semantic mapping enhances geometric representations by incorporating information at the object and context levels, 

© 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

> arXiv:2606.24814v2 [cs.RO] 30 Jun 2026

Fig. 1: Contextual Semantic Mapping Pipeline thereby enabling robots to reason beyond purely spatial struc-tures [14]. Initial approaches couple SLAM with recognition of defined object classes to assign semantic labels to spatial maps using RGB-D and LiDAR data [4], [6], [7]. For example, [4] fuse RGB-D and LiDAR data within a SLAM pipeline and project YOLO-based detections into the map for semantic filtering. Similarly, [6] construct persistent object-level maps, while [7] improve robustness through temporal consistency. While effective, these methods rely on closed-vocabulary mod-els and are therefore limited to predefined object categories. Several works extend semantic mapping toward multi-level map representations. Hierarchical and object-centric approaches organize environments into multiple abstraction levels [3], while scene graph representations encode relation-ships between entities [2]. However, these methods primarily focus on structural organization rather than semantic reasoning about object properties and context. In dynamic environments, [15] combine segmentation and motion cues to identify and remove moving objects during SLAM, improving localization accuracy but relying on observed motion. More recent work explores open-vocabulary semantic map-ping. VLMaps [9] fuse CLIP-based visual-language embed-dings with 3D reconstructions, enabling flexible semantic queries at runtime. Related approaches incorporate CLIP features into SLAM pipelines for open-vocabulary object localization and multi-view fusion [8], [16]. While these methods improve flexibility, they primarily focus on object identification and retrieval, and dense feature representations can introduce object ambiguities [9]. Overall, existing approaches provide either closed-set se-mantic maps or open-vocabulary representations without deeper contextual understanding. In contrast, we incorporate vision-language-based reasoning into the mapping process to infer object properties and enable context-aware map filtering. 

B. Foundation Models for Visual Perception 

Recent advances in foundation models have significantly expanded visual perception capabilities by providing com-plementary mechanisms for segmentation, open-vocabulary recognition, and language grounding. SAM [13] enables high-quality, class-agnostic segmentation by generating ob-ject masks from image prompts, with extensions supporting concept-level grounding through language [17]. In contrast, VLMs such as CLIP [12] learn a joint embedding space for images and text, enabling open-vocabulary classification. Grounding DINO [18] further extends these capabilities by performing language-guided object detection through cross-modal attention. These models are often combined into integrated pipelines. Grounded-SAM [19] first generates bounding boxes from text prompts using Grounding DINO and then refines them into pixel-level masks with SAM, enabling automatic object annotation. While effective, such approaches depend on ac-curate tagging models, which can be unreliable in cluttered environments. In contrast to prompt-based approaches, we adopt a bottom-up paradigm to eliminate dependence on manual prompts and enhance segmentation quality. We first generate fine-grained masks automatically with SAM and then aggregate them into persistent object-level instances through clustering in the geometric map. Language-guided perception pipelines further incorporate higher-level reasoning into detection. [20] generate structured scene descriptions using VLMs to guide open-vocabulary detection and segmentation, while [21] use a VLM in combi-nation with Grounding DINO and SAM for extracting open-vocabulary 3D object representations. However, these ap-proaches rely on single-view reasoning or predefined targets in structured environments, which limits robustness in industrial settings. Despite these advances, most methods remain image-centric and focus on object identity rather than contextual reasoning and scene understanding. [22] incorporate temporal informa-tion to improve segmentation quality, but likewise without accounting for context. In contrast, we use segmentation as an intermediate representation, aggregate object observations across multiple views, and enable subsequent semantic rea-soning within a spatial map. 

C. Language-Based Semantic Reasoning 

Vision-language models enable reasoning beyond object recognition, including the inference of attributes, relationships, and contextual properties [12], [23]. Recent work extends these capabilities to spatial reasoning by incorporating depth and region-level representations [24]. In robotics, language models have been applied to percep-tion, mapping, and planning. For example, [25] incorporate language priors into SLAM, while [26] use language-based reasoning for navigation. Structured representations such as scene graphs enable relational reasoning [27], [28], and sys-tems such as osmAG-LLM [29] performs reasoning over semantic maps to generate navigation goals verified through perception. Generative approaches further demonstrate the potential of language models for scene understanding. MetaScenes [30] combine SAM-based segmentation with VLMs to generate detailed object descriptions, including attributes such as mate-rial and physical properties. However, these approaches focus on scene interpretation or reconstruction and do not integrate semantic reasoning into navigation-relevant mapping. A key challenge in applying language models is robustness. Prior work shows that performance depends on prompting strategies and can suffer from hallucinations [31], [32]. More-over, most systems apply language models either at the image level or as post-processing on pre-built representations, often relying on sparse or single-view observations. In contrast, we integrate language-based reasoning directly into the mapping pipeline, using aggregated multi-view observations to infer object properties and enrich the semantic map representation. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

AMRs operating in indoor environments rely on geometric maps–typically 2D static occupancy grid maps–generated by SLAM algorithms. These maps represent the spatial structure of the environment and can be used for localization and path planning, but do not contain information about the semantic identity or contextual properties of objects present in the scene. The goal of this work is to generate semantic maps of intral-ogistics environments that augment geometric structure with context-aware object understanding, including properties such as object movability. Such maps enable higher-level operations and natural language queries, for example ”transport the pallet from the transfer station to the shelf” , which require semantic object understanding and spatial grounding in the environment, while identifying dynamic objects in the environment can improve the robustness of the localization. 

A. Sensor Observations 

We employ a standard sensor configuration in industrial mobile robotics: two 2D laser scanners providing 360° range measurements and a forward-facing RGB camera that captures visual information. During exploration of the environment, the robot collects a sequence of synchronized sensor observations 

O = {(Ii, S i)}Ti=1 (1) where Ii and Si denote the RGB image and 2D laser scan in the robot coordinate frame at time step i, referred to as a 

frame , and T is the total number of frames. 

B. Geometric Map Representation 

The geometric map is represented as a 2D point cloud, which serves as a flexible intermediate form convertible to occupancy grid maps or cost maps. The geometric map is a collection of 2-dimensional points: 

GM = {pi}ni=1 (2) where pi ∈ R2 denotes the position (x, y ) of point i in the map coordinate frame, and n is the total number of points. 

C. Contextual Semantic Map Representation 

The contextual semantic map representation extends GM 

by attaching per-point semantic and contextual attributes. The resulting representation of the environment is a collection of 6-dimensional points: 

SM = {(pi, cls i, ins i, m i)}ni=1 (3) where cls i is the semantic object class, ins i is the instance identifier, and mi ∈ { immovable, movable, mobile } is the movability property of the corresponding object. We define three movability categories: immovable for fixed infrastructure, 

movable for objects that are transportable but lack intrinsic mobility, and mobile for objects that are self-moving or mounted on a mobile carrier. 

D. Contextual Semantic Mapping Task 

Given the observation sequence O, the objective is to es-timate SM –a geometrically grounded, semantically enriched representation of the environment. For each point pi, the pipeline assigns cls i, ins i, and mi by combining SAM-based instance segmentation, instance clustering, and VLM-based contextual and semantic reasoning. IV. C ONTEXTUAL SEMANTIC MAPPING PIPELINE 

We propose a multimodal mapping framework that in-tegrates geometric mapping, instance-level perception, and VLM-based multi-view reasoning to generate a contextual semantic map representation of intralogistics environments. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the system consists of five main modules: geometric mapping, instance segmentation, instance clustering, VLM-based reasoning, and map fusion. The system takes as input synchronized measurements from an RGB camera and two 2D laser scanners. Temporal syn-chronization establishes a point-to-pixel correspondence that associates geometric observations from the laser scanners with visual information extracted from camera images, enabling joint spatial-semantic processing throughout the pipeline. 

A. Geometric Mapping 

The laser scans are first processed in a geometric mapping module. We apply a scan filtering step to remove overlapping projected points caused by the spatial offset between the camera and laser scanner. Specifically, when scan points are reprojected into the camera coordinate frame, sensor place-ment differences can cause multiple points to overlap in the image plane; these ambiguities are filtered prior to downstream processing. After preprocessing, filtered scans are used for 2D geometric mapping using SLAM. In this work, we employ GMapping to estimate robot poses and build the geometric map GM of the environment. 

B. Instance Segmentation 

We apply the automatic mask generation pipeline of SAM [13] to each RGB image independently, producing fine-grained, class-agnostic segmentation masks. The established point-to-pixel correspondence is used to project segmented instances into the geometric map coordinate frame, associating each mask with a spatial footprint in GM .

C. Instance Clustering 

To associate observations of the same physical object across frames, we introduce an instance clustering module operating in the geometric map space. Projected instances are clustered based on pairwise intersection-over-union (IoU): instances with IoU > 0.3 are grouped as observations of the same object. The resulting clusters serve two purposes–they provide persistent object-level representations for map fusion, and ag-gregate multi-view observations passed to the VLM reasoning module. 

D. VLM-Based Reasoning 

Aggregated multi-view observations of each object cluster are passed to a VLM, which infers object class and movability in a zero-shot, open-vocabulary setting. The reasoning module is described in detail in Section V. 

E. Map Fusion 

The fusion module integrates three information sources: (i) the geometric map GM produced by SLAM, (ii) clustered object instances from segmentation and clustering, and (iii) semantic and contextual attributes inferred by the VLM, to produce the final semantic map SM as defined in Section III. Each object instance is represented by its spatial footprint, semantic class, and movability, yielding a contextual semantic map representation that supports both geometric localization and context-aware reasoning. V. V ISION -L ANGUAGE MODEL REASONING 

To obtain semantic understanding of the environment, we employ a VLM in a zero-shot, open-vocabulary setting to infer object classes and movability–the primary contextual prop-erty for distinguishing static infrastructure from potentially dynamic objects in intralogistics environments. 

A. Visual Input Representation 

Each object instance is represented by a composite image comprising (i) a full-scene view in which the target object is highlighted using a green segmentation mask to provide spatial context, and (ii) a cropped close-up of the object that preserves fine-grained visual details (Fig. 2). The close-up views are generated directly from the segmentation masks with a small amount of padding around the object. To improve robustness to occlusions and partial visibility, multiple views of the same object instance are provided jointly, allowing the VLM to integrate complementary observations across viewpoints and resolve ambiguities that may arise from individual frames. 

Fig. 2: Composite VLM input image showing a charging station with a textual label. Left: full-scene view with green segmentation mask highlight. Right: cropped object view. 

B. Prompt Design and Reasoning Strategy 

Inference is guided by a structured prompt defining the task, a movability ontology, and a JSON output format. We compare two prompting strategies: direct JSON prompting, which returns a structured output directly, and CoT-augmented JSON prompting, which precedes the JSON output with an explicit chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning process covering vi-sual feature extraction, multi-view aggregation, and reasoning. The effect of CoT augmentation on classification performance is evaluated in Section VI-C. The prompt follows a fixed structure; an abbreviated version is shown below. Prompt Template (Abbreviated)                 

> Role: Expert AI for visual perception in intralogistics
> Task: Classify the highlighted object and infer its movability
> Input: Composite images (full-scene + cropped close-up) of the same object instance
> Process (optional):
> 1) Perception: Extract visual features (shape, ground contact, carriers, context) 2) Multi-view aggregation: Combine observations and resolve ambiguities 3) Reasoning: Infer object class and movability
> Movability ontology:
> 1) Immovable: Fixed infrastructure (e.g., wall, shelf, barrier, charging station) 2) Movable: Transportable, no intrinsic mobility (e.g., pallet, box, container) 3) Mobile: Self-moving, on wheels, or on mobile carrier (e.g., human, AMR, pallet on forklift)
> Output: JSON, optionally preceded by CoT reasoning

Contextual reasoning plays a key role: for example, a pallet is classified as movable when standing on the floor, but as 

mobile when placed on a pallet jack or forklift (Fig. 3). Distinctions like these require reasoning about object relation-ships, rather than appearance alone. 

Fig. 3: Composite VLM input showing a pallet on a pallet jack. Left: full-scene view with green segmentation mask highlight. Right: cropped object view. 

C. Structured Output and Map Integration 

The VLM returns a structured JSON containing the inferred object class, object movability, and a short explanation for traceability, ensuring consistent downstream processing: JSON Output for Fig. 3                    

> {
> "object_class": "pallet on pallet jack", "movability": mobile, "short_explanation": "The pallet is currently being transported by amobile pallet jack, making it mobile in this context."
> }

If no reliable prediction is possible, a fallback (object_class: unknown , movability: unknown )is returned. The predicted attributes cls i and mi are assigned to the corresponding object instance and propagated to all map points 

pi belonging to that instance, yielding the semantic map SM 

as defined in Section III. 

D. Design Choices 

The following design choices were evaluated to obtain a robust configuration for VLM-based semantic reasoning. 

Input representation. Explored formats included full-scene images with bounding-box or segmentation mask overlays, cropped-only views, and composite representations. The com-posite format–combining a full-scene segmentation mask with a cropped object view–yielded the most reliable results. It provides both spatial context and fine-grained object detail, and proved essential for directing model attention toward the highlighted object rather than visually dominant elements. 

Prompt design. Evaluated variants included short and de-tailed instructions, prompts with and without output examples, and prompts with and without explicit reasoning steps. Best results were obtained with structured prompts containing an explicit movability ontology. Output examples were omitted to avoid anchoring bias toward specific object classes. The effect of CoT-reasoning is analyzed in Section VI-C. 

Contextual text. For process-specific infrastructure such as charging and transfer stations, textual labels were placed on objects in the scene. The VLM reliably leverages such in-scene text even under low resolution and motion blur. VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND EVALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

Experiments are conducted in a controlled intralogistics environment comprising 18 object instances from 13 semantic classes, where instances refer to physical objects and classes to their semantic categories. Data is recorded using the sensor configuration described in Section IV and subsampled via motion thresholds (30 cm translation or 15 ◦ rotation), yielding 74 frames. 1 Each object is observed from multiple viewpoints; all available views are provided jointly as composite images in a single query. In Section VI-C, we first conduct a VLM study in which the pipeline is kept fixed and only the semantic inference stage is varied. We analyze the effect of (i) VLM choice and (ii) prompting strategy–direct JSON prompting vs. CoT-augmented JSON prompting–on open-vocabulary classifica-tion and movability inference accuracy. Three VLMs are evaluated: Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite (released March 2026), a lightweight model optimized for efficiency; GPT-5.1 (released November 2025), a high-capacity general-purpose model; and 

GPT-o3 (released April 2025), a reasoning-optimized model designed for structured multi-step inference. This selection covers the trade-off between inference efficiency, model ca-pacity, and reasoning ability. 

> 1The dataset, including RGB images, laser scans, instance annotations, and the VLM prompts, is publicly available: https://doi.org/10.35097/qx7b62vnbercxzj9.

To identify system bottlenecks and quantify individual com-ponent contributions, we further conduct a component analysis in Section VI-D using ground-truth substitution, with the VLM configuration fixed to the best-performing combination from the VLM study. Ground-truth annotations were manually generated for the final map as well as for each intermediate module. For the instance segmentation module, ground-truth instance masks were obtained by manually providing positive and negative point prompts to SAM. For the instance cluster-ing module, objects were manually annotated with bounding boxes, and segmented instances belonging to the same object were explicitly associated. Semantic and movability labels were added to the objects to obtain the groud-truth for the VLM-reasoning module and the contextual semantic maps. 

B. Evaluation Metrics 

Semantic segmentation is evaluated using mean intersec-tion over union (mIoU). For each semantic class c present in the ground truth, IoU is computed as IoU c = TP c

TP c + FP c + FN c

, (4) where TP c, FP c, and FN c denote the number of points cor-rectly classified, falsely assigned to class c, and missed for class c, respectively. The mIoU is averaged over all classes present in the ground truth. We evaluate movability classification as balanced per-class accuracy over the three movability classes: immovable, movable, and mobile. For each movability class present in the ground truth, we compute the fraction of valid points of that class whose predicted movability matches the ground-truth. The final score (mAcc) is the average of these per-class accuracies. This gives equal weight to each movability class and avoids domination by classes containing many more points. Since our mapping pipeline is also able to understand the environment in a panoptic manner (a combination of instance segmentation and semantic segmentation), we further evalu-ate the panoptic segmentation performance using Panoptic Quality (PQ) [33]. Panoptic Quality is defined as PQ =

P 

> (p,g )∈T P

IoU (p, g )

|T P | + 12 |F P | + 12 |F N | . (5) Here, a predicted segment p and a ground-truth segment g are considered a true positive (TP) if their IoU (p, g ) > 0.5. PQ is computed per class and then averaged over all classes to obtain the final score. 

C. Vision-Language Model Study 

Table I reports the semantic classification (mIoU) and movability accuracy (mAcc) for the three VLMs under two prompting strategies. All models are evaluated zero-shot, with-out fine-tuning or in-context examples, via their respective APIs. Typical queries comprise ∼700 prompt tokens and ∼600 image tokens per view, yielding a ∼75-token JSON response; CoT-JSON prompting adds ∼300 reasoning tokens. Per-object TABLE I: Semantic classification (mIoU) and movability ac-curacy (mAcc) in % for different VLM models and prompting strategies. Deviations exceeding 2% relative to the direct JSON prompting baseline are highlighted (red: degradation, green: improvement).                        

> Model →Gemini 3.1 FL GPT-5.1 GPT-o3 Prompt ↓mIoU mAcc mIoU mAcc mIoU mAcc Direct JSON 98.93 89.17 74.38 96.28 88.67 93.38 CoT JSON 89.43 92.56 68.13 96.42 92.89 89.11

inference takes approximately 5–10 s depending on view count and model. 

VLM comparison. Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite achieves the highest semantic classification accuracy with direct prompting (98.93% mIoU), while GPT-5.1 lags substantially (74.38%), suggesting weaker open-vocabulary visual grounding. GPT-5.1, however, achieves the highest movability accuracy (96.28%), indicating stronger contextual reasoning despite weaker visual classification. GPT-o3 occupies a middle ground on both metrics (88.67% mIoU, 93.38% mAcc), offering a balanced performance across both tasks. Overall, Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite provides the best trade-off between semantic classification and movability accuracy. 

Prompting strategy. The effect of CoT reasoning is model-dependent. For Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite, CoT degrades mIoU by 9.50% while improving mAcc by 3.39%, suggesting that explicit reasoning steps introduce classification uncertainty without proportional benefit for this model. GPT-5.1 shows a similar pattern, with mIoU decreasing by 6.25% under CoT. In contrast, GPT-o3 benefits from CoT reasoning, gaining 4.22% in mIoU, consistent with its design as a reasoning-optimized model. Overall, direct JSON prompting achieves higher semantic classification accuracy across all models, while movability accuracy remains largely unaffected by the prompting strategy. 

D. Component Analysis 

Based on the results of Section VI-C, Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite with direct JSON prompting achieves the best overall semantic classification performance and is therefore used for all subsequent experiments. The full pipeline serves as the baseline. To investigate the benefit of multi-view reasoning, we additionally evaluate a single-view variant in which the VLM receives only one composite image per object instance. To identify system bottlenecks, oracle experiments are conducted in which each module is individually replaced with ground-truth inputs. Results are reported in Table II. The full pipeline achieves 98.93% mIoU for the semantic segmentation, 89.17% mAcc for the movability estimation, and 89.78% PQ for the panoptic segmentation, demonstrating robust scene understanding ability in cluttered intralogistics environments. Qualitative mapping results are shown in Fig. 4, together with the corresponding manually annotated ground-truth for comparison. Fig. 4: Visualization of the semantic and movability maps from the experiment. (a) Predicted semantic map; (b) ground-truth semantic map; (c) predicted movability map; and (d) ground-truth movability map. Major incorrect estimations in both predicted maps are highlighted with red bounding boxes. Semantic labels marked with * denote categories absent from the ground truth but appearing in the estimated map. TABLE II: Component analysis with oracle substitution. ✓

and × indicate enabled and disabled modules, respectively. 

⋆ denotes oracle substitution with ground truth. Changes ex-ceeding 2% relative to the baseline (first row) are highlighted (red: degradation, green: improvement).                                                 

> SAM multi-view VLM fusion mIoU mAcc PQ
> ✓✓✓✓98.93 89.17 89.78
> ✓×✓✓65.90 94.90 52.83
> ⋆✓✓✓91.74 96.85 88.59
> ✓⋆✓✓99.81 88.15 89.08
> ✓✓⋆✓99.48 99.82 90.08
> ✓✓✓⋆98.96 89.22 98.92
> ⋆⋆⋆⋆99.91 100 99.91

Disabling the multi-view input leads to a slight increase of 5.73% in the movability mAcc, but causes a substantial drop (over 30%) in all other metrics, indicating that multi-view input is necessary for maintaining consistent semantic reasoning, while multiple independent reasoning can improve contextual understanding. Replacing individual components with ground truth pro-vides further insights. Using ground-truth segmentation results in an improvement of 7.68% in mAcc but a degradation of 7.49% in semantic mapping performance (mIoU). This observation appears counterintuitive, as one might expect per-fect segmentation masks to improve downstream recognition. One possible explanation is that current VLMs may not rely on masks as strict pixel-level grounding signals. Using the ground-truth clustering to aggregate multi-views of one object together does not lead to noticeable improvements, suggesting that clustering is not a bottleneck for the multi-view reasoning. In contrast, substituting the VLM with ground-truth (VLM GT) improves mAcc for over 10%, indicating that reasoning remains a limiting factor. Improvements at the panoptic level are mainly observed when replacing the fusion stage, sug-gesting that instance association is the primary bottleneck for panoptic-level mapping. Finally, when all components are replaced with ground truth, the pipeline approaches optimal performance. The re-maining gap from perfect mIoU is mainly attributed to errors introduced during the fusion of point clouds and image ob-servations. This verifies the design of the proposed semantic mapping pipeline. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented a semantic mapping pipeline for intralogistics environments that integrates SLAM-based geometric mapping, SAM-based instance segmentation, instance clustering, and VLM-based contextual reasoning. By aggregating object ob-servations across multiple viewpoints and reasoning over them in a zero-shot, open-vocabulary setting, the pipeline produces a contextual semantic map representation encoding geomet-ric structure, semantic class, and object movability–enabling the distinction between static infrastructure and potentially dynamic objects without requiring task-specific training or predefined object categories. Experimental results demonstrate that Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite with direct JSON prompting achieves the highest semantic classification accuracy (98.93% mIoU), while component anal-ysis confirms that multi-view reasoning is essential for consis-tent spatial and semantic grouping. VLM-based reasoning is identified as the primary bottleneck for movability estimation, and instance association as the main limitation for panoptic performance. The current system operates offline on pre-recorded data and is evaluated in a single controlled environment. Future work will focus on online semantic map updating to handle dynamic object states, extension to 3D environments using 3D LiDAR sensors, and evaluation across diverse intralo-gistics scenarios. Incorporating additional contextual prop-erties beyond movability–such as functional state or spatial relationships–represents a further direction toward richer, task-aware semantic representations. REFERENCES [1] C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scaramuzza, J. Neira, I. Reid, and J. J. Leonard, “Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the Robust-Perception Age,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1309–1332, 2016. [2] I. Armeni, Z.-Y. He, A. Zamir, J. Gwak, J. Malik, M. Fischer, and S. Savarese, “3D scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3D space, and camera,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Seoul, South Korea, 2019, pp. 5663–5672. [3] J. Zhou, A. Elksnis, Z. Fu, B. Chen, and C. Yang, “MultiMap3D: A multi-level semantic perceptual map construction based on SLAM and point cloud detection,” in 2023 28th International Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC) . Birmingham, United Kingdom: IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6. [4] R. Alqobali, R. Alnasser, A. Rashidi, M. Alshmrani, and T. Alhmiedat, “A real-time semantic map production system for indoor robot naviga-tion,” Sensors , vol. 24, no. 20, p. 6691, 2024. [5] T. Lackner, J. Hermann, C. Kuhn, and D. Palm, “Review of autonomous mobile robots in intralogistics: state-of-the-art, limitations and research gaps,” Procedia CIRP , vol. 130, pp. 930–935, 2024. [6] R. Martins, D. Bersan, M. F. M. Campos, and E. R. Nascimento, “Extending maps with semantic and contextual object information for robot navigation: A learning-based framework using visual and depth cues,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , vol. 99, pp. 555–569, 2020. [7] X. Song, Z. Zhijiang, X. Liang, and Z. Huaidong, “Monocular camera and laser based semantic mapping system with temporal-spatial data as-sociation for indoor mobile robots,” Multimedia Tools and Applications ,vol. 82, no. 22, pp. 34 459–34 484, 2023. [8] B. Chen, F. Xia, B. Ichter, K. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan, M. S. Ryoo, A. Stone, and D. Kappler, “Open-vocabulary queryable scene represen-tations for real world planning,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , London, United Kingdom, 2023, pp. 11 509–11 522. [9] C. Huang, O. Mees, A. Zeng, and W. Burgard, “Visual language maps for robot navigation,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . London, United Kingdom: IEEE, 2023, pp. 10 608–10 615. [10] P. G. Pawar and V. Devendran, “Scene understanding: A survey to see the world at a single glance,” in 2019 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Communication and Computational Techniques (ICCT) .Jaipur, India: IEEE, 2019, pp. 182–186. [11] C. K. I. Williams, “Structured generative models for scene understand-ing,” International Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 133, no. 5, pp. 2845–2867, 2025. [12] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion,” Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 139, pp. 8748–8763, 2021. [13] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Doll´ ar, and R. Girshick, “Segment anything,” 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02643. [14] S. Raychaudhuri and A. X. Chang, “Semantic mapping in indoor embodied AI: A survey on advances, challenges, and future directions,” 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05750. [15] C. Zheng, P. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Semantic SLAM system for mobile robots based on large visual model in complex environments,” Scientific Reports , vol. 15, no. 1, p. 8450, 2025. [16] T. B. Martins, M. R. Oswald, and J. Civera, “Open-vocabulary online semantic mapping for SLAM,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 11 745–11 752, 2025. [17] N. Carion, L. Gustafson, Y.-T. Hu, S. Debnath, R. Hu, D. Suris, C. Ryali, K. V. Alwala, H. Khedr, A. Huang, J. Lei, T. Ma, A. Kalla, M. Marks, J. Greer, M. Wang, P. Sun, R. R¨ adle, E. Mavroudi, K. Xu, T.-H. Wu, Y. Zhou, L. Momeni, R. Hazra, S. Ding, S. Vaze, F. Porcher, F. Li, S. Li, A. Kamath, H. Kei, P. Doll´ ar, N. Ravi, K. Saenko, P. Zhang, and C. Feichtenhofer, “SAM 3: Segment anything with concepts,” 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719. [18] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , A. Leonardis, E. Ricci, S. Roth, O. Russakovsky, T. Sattler, and G. Varol, Eds. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025, vol. 15105, pp. 38–55, series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. [19] T. Ren, S. Liu, A. Zeng, J. Lin, K. Li, H. Cao, J. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Chen, F. Yan, Z. Zeng, H. Zhang, F. Li, J. Yang, H. Li, Q. Jiang, and L. Zhang, “Grounded SAM: assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks,” 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv.2401.14159. [20] B. P¨ atzold, J. Nogga, and S. Behnke, “Leveraging vision-language models for open-vocabulary instance segmentation and tracking,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 11 578 – 11 585, 2025. [21] Y. Shi, D. Wen, G. Chen, E. Welte, S. Liu, K. Peng, R. Stiefelhagen, and R. Rayyes, “VISO-Grasp: Vision-language informed spatial object-centric 6-DoF active view planning and grasping in clutter and invisibil-ity,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . Hangzhou, China: IEEE, 2025, pp. 14 931–14 938. [22] T. Zemskova, M. Kichik, D. Yudin, A. Staroverov, and A. Panov, “SegmATRon: Embodied adaptive semantic segmentation for indoor environment,” Neurocomputing , vol. 638, p. 130169, 2025. [23] W. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, J. Wu, X. Zhu, G. Zeng, P. Luo, T. Lu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, and J. Dai, “VisionLLM: Large language model is also an open-ended decoder for vision-centric tasks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, Eds., vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 61 501–61 513. [24] A.-C. Cheng, H. Yin, Y. Fu, Q. Guo, R. Yang, J. Kautz, X. Wang, and S. Liu, “SpatialRGPT: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision-language models,” 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,pp. 135 062 – 135 093, 2024. [25] Y. Jiao, Y. Qiu, and H. I. Christensen, “Real-time indoor object SLAM with LLM-enhanced priors,” 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21602. [26] J. Shi, S. Yagi, S. Yamamori, and J. Morimoto, “LLM-guided zero-shot visual object navigation with building semantic map,” in 2025 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration (SII) , Mu-nich, Germany, 2025, pp. 1274–1279. [27] A. G. Puigjaner, A. Zacharia, and K. Alexis, “Relationship-aware hierarchical 3D scene graph for task reasoning,” 2026, arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02456. [28] Q. Xie, Z. Liang, F. Li, and L. Zeng, “DSM: Constructing a diverse semantic map for 3D visual grounding,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 6344–6351, 2026. [29] F. Xie, S. Schwertfeger, and H. Blum, “osmAG-LLM: Zero-shot open-vocabulary object navigation via semantic maps and large language models reasoning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2426–2433, 2026. [30] H. Yu, B. Jia, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, P. Li, R. Su, J. Li, Q. Li, W. Liang, S.-C. Zhu, T. Liu, and S. Huang, “MetaScenes: Towards automated replica cre-ation for real-world 3D scans,” 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02388. [31] J. Moncada-Ramirez, J.-L. Matez-Bandera, J. Gonzalez-Jimenez, and J.-R. Ruiz-Sarmiento, “Agentic workflows for improving large language model reasoning in robotic object-centered planning,” Robotics , vol. 14, no. 3, p. 24, 2025. [32] A. Mohanty, V. B. Parthasarathy, and A. Shahid, “The future of MLLM prompting is adaptive: a comprehensive experimental evaluation of prompt engineering methods for robust multimodal performance,” 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. [33] A. Kirillov, K. He, R. Girshick, C. Rother, and P. Doll´ ar, “Panoptic segmentation,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . Long Beach, CA, USA: IEEE, 2019, pp. 9396–9405.